                                                                                              AB 759
                                                                                              Page 1

Date of Hearing: April 29, 2021

                         ASSEMBLY COMMITTEE ON ELECTIONS
                                   Marc Berman, Chair
                        AB 759 (McCarty) – As Amended April 21, 2021

SUBJECT: Elections: county officers.

SUMMARY: Requires elective countywide officials to be elected during presidential election
years, instead of gubernatorial election years, beginning with either the 2024 or 2028 presidential
primary election. Specifically, this bill:

1) Repeals a requirement that an election to select county officers be held with the statewide
   primary election at which candidates for Governor are nominated, except as otherwise
   provided, and instead requires an election to select county officers be held with the
   presidential primary election.

2) Provides that this bill applies both to general law and charter counties.

3) Provides that for a county officer elected in 2022, a county (including a charter county) may
   provide by ordinance for a two-year term, with the next election for that office occurring at
   the presidential primary election in 2024, or a six-year term, with the next election for that
   office occurring at the presidential primary election in 2028.

4) Provides for the provisions of this bill to become operative on January 1, 2023.

5) Makes corresponding changes.

EXISTING LAW:

1) Requires the Legislature, pursuant to the California Constitution, to provide for county
   powers, an elected county sheriff, an elected district attorney, an elected assessor, and an
   elected governing body in each county.

2) Permits a county, for its own government, to adopt a charter by majority vote of its electors
   voting on the question. Requires a county charter to provide for an elected sheriff, an elected
   district attorney, an elected assessor, other officers, their election or appointment,
   compensation, terms, and removal, among other provisions.

3) Provides that specified general laws adopted by the Legislature to govern the powers and
   officers of counties are superseded by a legally adopted county charter as to matters for
   which the California Constitution permits a county to make provision in its charter, except as
   specified.

4) Requires, pursuant to the California Constitution, that all county offices be nonpartisan.

5) Provides for various county officers, and requires the county treasurer, county clerk, auditor,
   sheriff, tax collector, district attorney, recorder, assessor, public administrator, and coroner to
   be elective offices. Permits any county office other than sheriff, district attorney, assessor,
   and supervisor to become an appointive office upon approval of the voters of the county, as
                                                                                             AB 759
                                                                                             Page 2

   specified.

6) Requires elective county officers to be elected at the general election at which the Governor
   is elected, except as specified. Requires an election to select county officers to be held with
   the statewide primary at which candidates for Governor are nominated, except as specified.
   Establishes a procedure for the elections of county supervisors to be staggered by dividing
   the supervisors into two classes. As a result of this procedure, some county supervisors are
   elected in gubernatorial election years, while other supervisors are elected in presidential
   election years.

7) Provides that a candidate for nonpartisan office who receives a majority of the votes in the
   primary election shall be elected to that office, and provides that the office shall not appear
   on the ballot at the ensuing general election. Provides that if a county officer is not elected at
   the primary election, a county general election shall be held with the statewide general
   election to select county officers.

FISCAL EFFECT: Unknown. State-mandated local program; contains reimbursement
direction.

COMMENTS:

1) Purpose of the Bill: According to the author:

       Local government, specifically, county officers and their policies have an
       immediate and direct effect on our daily lives. However, voter turnout for local
       elections fluctuates significantly depending on what year elections are held. For
       example, in Sacramento County voter turnout was 14-16% higher in presidential
       election years compared to gubernatorial election years. AB 759 will promote
       political equality and enhanced citizen participation in county elections by
       aligning those elections with the presidential election.

2) Elections for County Office: As detailed above, the California Constitution requires that
   each county have at least three countywide elected offices—sheriff, district attorney, and
   assessor. Other countywide offices may be elected or appointed. As a result, the number of
   elected countywide offices varies by county; some counties have as few as three elected
   countywide offices, while one county has nine elected countywide offices. In accordance
   with the provisions of the Government Code outlined above, almost all countywide elected
   officers in California are elected in gubernatorial election years. (The exceptions are the
   district attorney in Los Angeles County, who is elected in presidential election years in
   accordance with the Los Angeles County Charter; and the mayor, city attorney, district
   attorney, sheriff, and treasurer in the City and County of San Francisco, who are elected at
   municipal elections in odd-numbered years following the gubernatorial election, in
   accordance with San Francisco’s charter.) About three-quarters of California counties have
   between five and seven countywide elected offices.

   Although this bill expressly provides that it applies to charter counties, it is not clear whether
   this bill can be made applicable to all charter counties, as discussed in more detail below.
   Even if this bill cannot be made applicable to certain charter counties, however, it
   nonetheless would change the dates of the election for most countywide officers in
                                                                                             AB 759
                                                                                             Page 3

   California. This bill is not expected, however, to affect the timing of the election of county
   supervisors. State law provides for county supervisors’ terms to be staggered such that some
   supervisors are elected in presidential years while others are elected in gubernatorial years,
   and nothing in this bill affects that requirement.

3) Charter Counties: The California Constitution allows cities and counties to adopt charters,
   which gives those jurisdictions greater autonomy over local affairs. For counties, the
   Constitution specifies that a county's charter shall provide for “an elected sheriff, an elected
   district attorney, an elected assessor, other officers, their election or appointment,
   compensation, terms and removal,” among other provisions. According to information from
   the California State Association of Counties, 14 (Alameda, Butte, El Dorado, Fresno, Los
   Angeles, Orange, Placer, Sacramento, San Bernardino, San Diego, San Francisco, San
   Mateo, Santa Clara, and Tehama) of California’s 58 counties are charter counties. The
   remaining 44 counties are commonly referred to as “general law” counties, because they are
   subject to the general laws passed by the Legislature.

   This bill expressly provides that it applies both to general law and charter counties. In most
   of California’s 14 charter counties, the charter provides for elective county officers to be
   nominated and elected in accordance with general law. At least four county charters,
   however, expressly provide the time at which certain county officers must be elected. The
   Los Angeles County Charter requires the district attorney to be elected in presidential
   election years, and requires the sheriff and assessor to be elected in gubernatorial election
   years. The San Bernardino County Charter requires all countywide elective offices to be
   elected in gubernatorial election years. The Santa Clara County Charter requires the assessor,
   district attorney, and sheriff to be elected at the same time that supervisors are elected in the
   First and Fourth Supervisorial districts, thereby requiring those officers to be elected in
   gubernatorial election years. Finally, San Francisco’s charter requires the mayor, city
   attorney, district attorney, sheriff, and to be elected at municipal elections in odd-numbered
   years following the gubernatorial election, and requires the assessor-recorder and public
   defender to be elected in gubernatorial election years. (San Francisco is a consolidated city
   and county, and therefore has the authority of both a charter city and a charter county.)

   Given the autonomy granted by the California Constitution to charter counties over elected
   county officers, including their election or appointment and their terms, it is unclear whether
   the provisions of this bill can be made applicable to charter counties—especially those whose
   charters conflict with this bill. It could be argued that this bill, by prescribing the election at
   which county officers must be elected, conflicts with a charter county’s authority to provide
   for the terms of elected county officers. On the other hand, this bill expressly permits
   counties to change the election of county officers from gubernatorial election cycles to
   presidential election cycles either by electing county officers to two-year terms at the
   gubernatorial election cycle in 2022, or by electing officers to six-year terms in 2022; it could
   be argued that this provision maintains charter counties’ autonomy over the terms of county
   officers, and thus that this bill does not infringe on the autonomy granted to charter counties
   under the California Constitution.

   Furthermore, the autonomy granted to charter counties over the election of county officers is
   considerably narrower than the autonomy that charter cities have over the election of city
   officers under the California Constitution. Notably, the Constitution provides that city
   charters may provide for the “conduct of city elections,” and grants “plenary authority” for a
                                                                                            AB 759
                                                                                            Page 4

   city charter to provide for “the manner in which, the method by which, the times at which,
   and the terms for which…municipal officers…shall be elected or appointed.” The fact that
   the Constitution expressly provides that city charters may provide for the conduct of city
   elections and the times at which municipal officers are elected, but does not similarly specify
   that county charters may include those types of provisions, supports the argument that the
   times at which county officers are elected is a subject that is controlled by state statute,
   notwithstanding any provision of a county charter to the contrary.

4) Presidential vs. Gubernatorial Elections: The author of this bill argues that county officers
   should be elected in presidential election years rather than gubernatorial election years
   because presidential elections tend to have higher turnout. Accordingly, the author maintains
   that electing county officers in presidential election years will “promote political equality and
   enhanced citizen participation.”

   Generally, it is true that voter participation in presidential elections in California exceeds
   voter participation in gubernatorial elections. In the last 40 years, voter turnout as a
   percentage of eligible voters has averaged 32.7% in presidential primary elections compared
   to 26.9% in gubernatorial primary elections (these figures exclude the 2008 primary election,
   when California held a standalone presidential primary election in February and a separate
   primary election for all other offices in June). For general elections over the same time
   period, voter turnout in presidential elections has averaged 57.3% of eligible voters compared
   to 42.4% of eligible voters in gubernatorial elections.

   It isn’t always the case, however, that participation in presidential elections exceeds turnout
   in surrounding gubernatorial elections. For example, turnout in the 1982 gubernatorial
   primary election (36.9%) exceeded turnout in the next (1984) presidential primary election
   (34.1%). Similarly, turnout in the 2010 gubernatorial primary election (24.1%) exceeded
   turnout in the next (2012) presidential primary election (22.5%).

   Notwithstanding the average differences in participation levels between presidential and
   gubernatorial election years, there are other factors that may have a larger impact in the
   number of voters who participate in electing county officers. For example, existing law
   allows a county officer to be elected outright in the primary election if a candidate receives
   more than 50% of the vote. Voter participation in general elections, however, tends to be
   considerably higher than in primary elections. As a result, an election for a county officer
   that is not decided in the primary election and that moves on to the general election is likely
   to have much higher participation than one that is decided in the primary election, regardless
   of whether the election is held in a gubernatorial or a presidential election year.

5) Trend Toward Consolidation of Elections: In recent legislative sessions, concerns about
   low and non-representative voter turnout have been the motivation behind a number of bills
   that moved votes for offices and ballot measures so that they occur at elections that are
   expected to have higher turnout. Specifically, SB 202 (Hancock), Chapter 558, Statutes of
   2011, prohibits state initiative and referendum measures that qualify for the ballot on or after
   July 1, 2011, from appearing on the ballot at statewide primary elections, and instead
   requires such measures to appear on the ballot only at the November statewide general
   election or at a statewide special election, among other provisions. AB 1344 (Feuer), Chapter
   692, Statutes of 2011, requires a city charter proposal or amendments to a city charter to be
   submitted to the voters for approval or rejection only at an established statewide general,
                                                                                             AB 759
                                                                                             Page 5

   statewide primary, or regularly scheduled municipal election date, among other provisions.
   SB 311 (Padilla), Chapter 184, Statutes of 2013, requires certain city charter proposals and
   city charter amendments to be submitted to the voters only at a statewide general election, as
   specified. SB 415 (Hueso), Chapter 235, Statutes of 2015, prohibits a local government from
   holding an election on any date other than a statewide election date if doing so in the past has
   resulted in turnout that is at least 25% below the average turnout in that jurisdiction in the
   last four statewide general elections, as specified. Finally, AB 765 (Low), Chapter 748,
   Statutes of 2017, eliminated a requirement that a special election be held to vote on a local
   initiative measure in certain situations, and instead generally provides for local initiative
   measures to be submitted to voters at regularly scheduled elections. Collectively, these bills
   resulted in a larger number of offices and ballot measures being voted on at statewide
   primary, statewide general, and other regularly scheduled elections, which generally have
   higher turnout than standalone local or special elections.

   This bill similarly seeks to improve participation in elections for countywide offices by
   requiring those offices to appear on the ballot at presidential elections—the type of elections
   that generally (but not always) have the highest turnout. While such a move may help
   improve participation in elections for countywide office, it may also create other challenges
   for candidates for countywide office. Most notably, candidates for countywide office would
   have to compete for attention with candidates for president, which could make it harder for
   those county candidates to communicate their message to voters.

   In isolation, the changes proposed by this bill are expected to have a relatively modest effect
   on the number of contests or measures that voters must consider in presidential election
   years. In fact, because eight elective statewide offices (Governor, Lieutenant Governor,
   Secretary of State, Controller, Treasurer, Attorney General, Insurance Commissioner, and
   Superintendent of Public Instruction) and all four seats on the Board of Equalization are
   elected in gubernatorial election years along with most countywide elective offices, most
   voters in the state probably vote on a larger number of contests in gubernatorial election
   cycles than in presidential election cycles. Accordingly, moving elections for countywide
   office from gubernatorial election cycles to presidential election cycles may result in a more
   even balance of the number of contests on the ballot in each type of election cycle. If this bill
   prompts similar proposals to move elections for other offices (e.g., city offices; school
   district governing board members; special district governing board members) to the
   presidential election cycle, however, the presidential election ballot could quickly become
   much more crowded. In turn, candidates could face an even more significant challenge in
   competing for voters’ attention with candidates for other offices.

6) Prior Effort in Sacramento County: In background materials submitted to the committee,
   the author noted that Sacramento County recently considered a similar proposal to amend the
   county’s charter to require countywide elected officers to be elected during the presidential
   election cycle. Specifically, on July 28, 2020, the Sacramento County Board of Supervisors
   received a report from staff as part of an informational item about the process for the county
   to consolidate elections for county sheriff, district attorney, and assessor with the presidential
   election cycle, rather than holding elections for those offices during the gubernatorial
   election cycle. As part of that agenda item, staff reported that such a consolidation could
   occur through an amendment to Sacramento County’s charter.

   Because the agenda item for the July 28 meeting was an informational item, no formal action
                                                                                              AB 759
                                                                                              Page 6

   was taken by the Board of Supervisors. At the conclusion of the discussion on that item, the
   chair of the board expressed his belief, based on feedback from other members of the board,
   that it would be fruitless to schedule a future special meeting for the board to vote on whether
   to place a charter amendment on the 2020 general election ballot to change the timing of
   county elections for sheriff, district attorney, and assessor.

7) Arguments in Support: In their letters in support of this bill, Courage California, the
   Democratic Party of Sacramento County, Organize Sacramento, Queer Democrats of
   Sacramento, and Sacramento Area Congregations Together, all state:

       Currently, countywide officers, which include the Sheriff, District Attorney and
       Assessor, are elected concurrently with the mid-term election cycle. These elected
       officers wield significant power in our communities, operating jails, prosecuting
       criminal violations, and assessing the value of real property. However, voter
       turnout during the mid-term election cycle is significantly less than during the
       presidential election cycle, resulting in less voter participation in the election of
       these critically important elected officers. AB 759 will improve election access
       for voters and increase voter turnout by changing the timing of countywide officer
       elections to run concurrently with presidential elections.

       The Public Policy Institute of California has found that the best instrument for
       increasing voter turnout is scheduling elections during the presidential election
       cycle. Research has also found that there is less regular voting participation by
       communities of color, specifically Latinos and Asian Americans, during the mid-
       term election cycle, which leads to systematic underrepresentation on local
       governing bodies. California has taken bold steps to make voting more accessible
       for everyone, and AB 759 builds on this important work by making the process of
       voting in local elections easier and more convenient.

8) Arguments in Opposition: In opposition to this bill, the California State Sheriffs’
   Association writes:

       While proponents may point to the notion that more voters on average may vote
       in presidential elections as a reason to move these elections, there is no guarantee
       that voters will examine their choices more carefully in a presidential election
       year or cast more votes in any particular contest. In fact, a longer election ballot
       could result in voter fatigue and fewer votes cast in “down-ticket” races. Instead,
       the only sure outcome is the administrative burden of upending the current
       election calendar.

       Additionally, depending on a county’s action, the bill could result in county
       officers elected in 2022 serving a two-year term only to have to seek re-election
       again in 2024 if the officer hoped to continue in office. This will require county
       resources and result in certain officers necessarily spending more time seeking
       election.

9) Related Legislation: SB 271 (Wiener), which is pending in the Senate Governance &
   Finance Committee, changes the eligibility requirements for candidates running for county
   sheriff.
                                                                                         AB 759
                                                                                         Page 7


   SB 286 (Min), which is pending in the Senate Elections & Constitutional Amendments
   Committee, would eliminate the ability of a candidate for elective county office to be elected
   at the primary election if the candidate receives a majority of the vote, and instead would
   provide for the two candidates for a county office who receive the most votes at the primary
   election to appear on the ballot at the general election, among other provisions.

REGISTERED SUPPORT / OPPOSITION:

Support

Courage California
Democratic Party of Sacramento County
League of Women Voters of California
Oakland Privacy (prior version)
Organize Sacramento
Queer Democrats of Sacramento
Sacramento Area Congregations Together

Opposition

California State Sheriffs’ Association

Analysis Prepared by: Ethan Jones / ELECTIONS / (916) 319-2094
