 
 Robert Luna, Alex Villanueva Advance in LA Sheriff Race 
 Skip to main content Skip to header left navigation Skip to header right navigation Skip to after header navigation Skip to site footer 
 Menu LAmag Culture, Food, Fashion, News & Los Angeles Search... Search site Submit search Subscribe 
 Newsletter 
 Advertise 
 News & City 
 Arts & Entertainment 
 Food & Drink 
 Life & Style 
 Events 
 Sports 
 Top Professionals 
 Awards 
 Travel 
 Newsletter Sign Up 
 Advertise 
 News & City 
 Arts & Entertainment 
 Food & Drink 
 Life & Style 
 Events 
 Sports 
 Top Professionals 
 Awards 
 Travel 
 Crime 
 Search Search site Submit search 
 Incumbent Robert Luna is Set to Face Predecessor Alex Villanueva in November for LA County Sheriff’s Race 
 Robert Luna and Alex Villanueva are set to face off in November for the second time 
 Marlee Turner 
 • Jun 11, 2026 
 Credit: Photo by FREDERIC J. BROWN/AFP via Getty Images 
 Just over a week after polls closed in the California primary, Los Angeles County Sheriff Robert Luna will face off against Alex Villanueva, his predecessor, in November.  
 Villanueva served as the 33rd sheriff of LA from 2018 to 2022, after beating then-incumbent Sheriff Jim McDonnell, making him the first to unseat an incumbent in 100 years.  
 This is the second time this pair has faced off in a general election. In 2022, Luna unseated Villanueva after earning 61% of the vote. Luna hopes to do it again.  
 Luna previously served as Long Beach Chief of Police and spent a total of 36 years with the department.  
 According to results released by the Los Angeles County Registrar-Recorder/County Clerk , Luna has received 44.18% of the votes in the June 2 primary, followed by Villanueva with 21.71% of the votes.  
 In an Instagram post on Wednesday, Villanueva writes that “We advanced through the June 2 primary, and I’m humbled by it. To every voter, volunteer, and family who got us here: thank you. I heard the same thing in every neighborhood across this county. People are tired of waiting for someone to take their safety seriously. I heard you.” 
 View this post on Instagram A post shared by Alex Villanueva (@sheriffvillanueva33) 
 He continues to say, “This was a two-step race. Now we take it to November.”  Scroll to continue reading 
 fresh drops 
 No Garden, No Problem: Starting a Thriving Plant Biome in Your Apartment 
 The Power Lunch Is Back At Bower Surf Club In Santa Monica 
 The Linda Lindas: Birthed by the Los Angeles Punk Scene 
 Tarik Skubal, the Dodgers and the Price of October 
 Both candidates are ready for what ought to be a tough general election in November.  
 Eric Strong, who lingered in third place with just under 15% of the vote, conceded the race on June 3, one day following election day.  
 Don’t keep it to yourself…share the love! 
 Facebook Tweet Read more from News & City , News & Politics Tag: Alex Villaneuva , Jim McDonnell , L.A. County Registrar , LASD , Registrar-Recorder/County Clerk , Robert Luna , Sheriff Villanueva 
 trending 
 Final Words Delivered in the Defense of Rapper Lil Durk 
 Inside Mica Miller’s Haunting Final Months: The REAL Story Behind Netflix’s ‘Death of the Pastor’s Wife’ 
 What the Jury Must Decide in the Lil Durk Trial 
 ‘Then All Hell Broke Loose’: Massive Sinkhole Opens Beneath Nicolas Cage’s Malibu Driveway 
 Rapper Lil Durk Found Not Guilty on All Charges 
 Sidebar 
 more 
 buzz 
 News & City Christa Pike Remains Unconscious on Ventilator After Failed Execution 
 Pike remains critically ill and on a ventilator as her attorneys seek an emergency order preserving evidence of what happened inside Tennessee’s execution chamber 
 by Lauren Conlin • Oct 2, 2026 
 Landlines Are Making a Comeback – But For Kids 
 L.A. County Now Mailing Ballots Ahead of General Election 
 Malibu Records 100,000 Speeding Violations in 10 Days 
 Gypsy Rose Blanchard’s Partner Dies Suddenly on His Birthday: What We Know So Far 
 Hilton and Becerra Face Off in California’s Only Scheduled Gubernatorial Debate 
 Gov. Newsom Signs New Bill Ending Child Marriage 
 Subscribe + Follow 
 Subscribe to Our Newsletter 
 Subscribe to Our Print Issues 
 Mayor Bass Signs New Immigration Enforcement Ordinance 
 by Kayla Christian • Oct 1, 2026 Immigration , News & City , News & Politics Higher Sales Tax Takes Effect in L.A. County 
 by Payton Zagacki • Oct 1, 2026 News & City The World’s Smallest Special Forces Operator Is a Chihuahua Named Comando 
 by Michele McPhee • Oct 1, 2026 Animals , News & City Luxury Hotel La Fontaine Set to Open in Century City 
 by Payton Zagacki • Oct 1, 2026 News & City Gov. Gavin Newsom Signs Landmark Bill To Save Local Journalist Jobs 
 by Michele McPhee • Sep 30, 2026 Media , News & Politics , Politics Load More 
 All Stories 
 Instagram 
 X 
 Facebook 
 YouTube 
 About Us 
 Contact Us 
 Advertise 
 Masthead 
 Stories 
 Powered by the BizBudding Publisher Network 
 Privacy Manager © 2026 · All Rights Reserved 
