 
 Luna, Villanueva to face off in LA County sheriff’s race – NBC Los Angeles 
 Skip to content 
 Main Navigation 
 Search 
 Search for: 
 Local 
 NBC4 Investigates 
 Weather 
 U.S. & World 
 Entertainment 
 Stream NBC LA News 24/7 
 Watch 24/7 
 Create profile / Log in 
 Dashboard 
 Email preferences 
 Sign out 
 Trending 
 ⚾Dodgers 
 🗳️Decision 2026 
 📍Problem Properties 
 👀 NBCLA on YouTube 
 🔍 NBC4 Investigates Tips 
 Expand 
 Decision 2026 
 Luna and Villanueva slated to face off in November for LA County sheriff's race 
 This will be the second time the two square off in a general election. 
 By Danielle Smith • 
 Published June 10, 2026 • 
 Updated on June 10, 2026 at 7:37 pm 
 BOOKMARKER 
 NBC Universal, Inc. 
 The race for California lieutenant governor has also been narrowed down to two candidates.  
 Los Angeles County Sheriff Robert Luna is set to face Alex Villanueva, his predecessor, in the November runoff. 
 This will be the second time the two square off in a general election. The incumbent, a former Long Beach police chief, unseated Villanueva in the 2022 election after getting about 61% of the vote. 
 Stream Los Angeles News for free, 24/7, wherever you are.   WATCH HERE 
 In 2018, Villanueva defeated then-Sheriff Jim McDonnell to become sheriff, making him the first candidate to oust an incumbent in the nation’s largest sheriff’s department in more than a century. Now, Villanueva is hoping Angelenos will vote out an incumbent again. 
 As of Wednesday afternoon, Luna has received 44.18% or 856,069 votes in the primary race, while Villanueva has 21.71% or 420,683 votes, according to the updated tally released by the Los Angeles County Registrar-Recorder/County Clerk. 
 Los Angeles County Registrar-Recorder/County Clerk Los Angeles County Registrar-Recorder/County Clerk The primary results for Los Angeles County sheriff as of June 10, 2026. 
 "We've advanced through the June 2 primary, and I'm humbled by it," Villanueva said in part of an emailed statement on Tuesday. "I've walked many neighborhoods across the county over these past few months, and what I heard everywhere was the same. People are tired of waiting for someone to take their safety seriously. I heard you, and I'm not going to let you down." 
 Eric Strong, who served as chief of campus safety and security operations in the probation office, was in third place with 14.95% of the vote. The Marine veteran and former member of the Compton and Pasadena police departments also finished third in the 2022 primary. 
 Local 
 Get Los Angeles's latest local news on crime, entertainment, weather, schools, cost of living and more. Here's your go-to source for today's LA news. 
 Crime and Courts 
 1 hour ago 
 FBI arrests Irvine woman accused of acting as Chinese agent at LAX, feds say 
 Decision 2026 
 3 hours ago 
 Nithya Raman delivers speech, outlining her first 100 days if elected LA mayor 
 Eight candidates for LASD sheriff were on the June primary ballot. 
 This article tagged under: 
 Decision 2026 
 on now 
 Hollywood Reeltime 
 Trending Stories 
 MLB 
 Teams to win 3 straight World Series: Dodgers chase rare feat in 2026 playoffs 
 Health 
 SoCal mom's warning after son hospitalized with West Nile. These were early signs 
 Taylor Swift 
 Taylor Swift debuts curly shoulder-length lob in latest hair transformation 
 Malibu 
 Shark attacks kayaker off coast of Paradise Cove in Malibu 
 Crime and Courts 
 FBI arrests Irvine woman accused of acting as Chinese agent at LAX, feds say 
 Weather Forecast 
 Facebook 
 Instagram 
 TikTok 
 Youtube 
 Newsletters 
 About Us 
 Our News Standards 
 Contact Us and Meet the News Team 
 Internships with NBC4 and Telemundo 52 
 Submit Tips for Investigations 
 Xfinity: Internet, TV, streaming, more 
 KNBC Public Inspection File 
 KNBC Accessibility 
 KNBC Employment Information 
 FCC Applications 
 Send Feedback 
 Advertise With Us 
 Privacy Policy 
 Terms of Service 
 Your Privacy Choices 
 CA Notice 
 Ad Choices 
 Copyright © 2026 NBCUniversal Media, LLC. All rights reserved 
 Close Menu 
 Create profile / Log in 
 Dashboard 
 Search for: 
 Local 
 Watch NBC4 News 24/7 
 California 
 US & World 
 Weather 
 NBC4 Investigates 
 Consumer 
 Submit a tip 
 Sports 
 Play The Challenge 
 Politics 
 NewsConference 
 Entertainment & Lifestyle 
 Entertainment News 
 The Scene 
 Travel & Adventure 
 NBC4 in the Community 
 Traffic 
 About Us 
 Our News Standards 
 Meet the News Team 
 Submit a Consumer Complaint 
 Send us your photos and videos 
 Contests 
 TV Schedule 
 Our Apps 
 Newsletters 
 Cozi TV 
 Follow Us 
 Facebook 
 Instagram 
 TikTok 
 Youtube 
 Contact Us 
