
 “Santa Clarita Sheriff's Prepare to Celebrate Station's Historical Milestone: 40 Years of Service to Santa Clarita” from LASD - Santa Clarita Valley Station, Los Angeles County Sheriff : Nixle 
 Nixle 
 Registered Subscribers: Sign In Here 
 Username, Email or Mobile Phone Number: 
 Password: 
 Remember Me 
 Citizen Login 
 Need your password? 
 No citizen account yet? Register now for free. 
 Receive alerts from your local agencies
 ...or text your ZIP CODE to 888777 for mobile alerts
 Full Notification 
 LASD - Santa Clarita Valley Station, Los Angeles County Sheriff 
 Thursday June 28th, 2012 :: 08:23 a.m. PDT 
 -->
 Community 
 Santa Clarita Sheriff's Prepare to Celebrate Station's Historical Milestone: 40 Years of Service to Santa Clarita 
 LOS ANGELES COUNTY SHERIFF’S DEPARTMENT CELEBRATES ITS 40TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE SANTA CLARITA VALLEY SHERIFF’S STATION AND REDEDICATION OF MEMORIAL GARDEN -- DEPUTY CONSTABLE J. EDWARD BROWN, WHO WAS KILLED IN THE LINE OF DUTY IN SANTA CLARITA ON SEPTEMBER 14, 1924, WILL BE ADDED TO THE MEMORIAL WALL Santa Clarita Sheriff's are Preparing to Celebrate the Station's Historical Milestone: 40 Years of Service to the Residents of Santa Clarita - Fallen Comrades to be Remembered with Rededication of Memorial Garden: Santa Clarita, CA, June 28, 2012 – More than 200 are expected to join Captain Paul Becker of the Santa Clarita Valley Sheriff's Station and other distinguished guests this morning to celebrate the current Santa Clarita Valley Sheriff’s Station’s 40 years of service to the Santa Clarita Valley. Officials will rededicate the station’s memorial garden. The name of a newly discovered fallen hero, Deputy Constable J. Edward Brown, who was the first law enforcement officer killed in the line of duty in Santa Clarita in 1924, will be added to the station’s memorial wall. Historical information will be provided at the event. About Deputy Constable J. Edward Brown: Edward Brown was born in Missouri in July 1878. He arrived in Saugus, California from Nevada with his wife, a registered nurse. He was appointed Deputy Constable and quickly earned a reputation as a brave and respected deputy. Deputy Constable Brown met his untimely death during a fierce gunfight in Saugus on Sunday, September 14, 1924. He was described as honest, congenial, just, and courageous. Deputy Constable Brown was very well regarded by all who knew him, and his bravery in law enforcement will never be forgotten. About the Santa Clarita Valley Sheriff’s Station: Area we serve The Santa Clarita Valley Sheriff’s Station provides law enforcement services for the 593 square miles of unincorporated Los Angeles County in the Santa Clarita Valley and 55 square miles of the city of Santa Clarita. Population (Unincorporated) 98,000 est. Population (Contract city of Santa Clarita) 177,000 est. City of Santa Clarita Contract Cost (FY 2011-2012) $20,542,294 The city of Santa Clarita was incorporated in 1987, becoming the largest new city in California. With a current estimated population of nearly 177,000, the city of Santa Clarita has grown to become the fourth largest in population in Los Angeles County and the 26th largest in the state. At the time of incorporation, the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department entered into an agreement with the city of Santa Clarita to provide law enforcement services, forming one of the largest law enforcement contractual partnerships in Los Angeles County. Today’s contractual law enforcement budget exceeds the $20 million mark and is the second largest in Los Angeles County. This crime prevention partnership has been going strong for nearly 25 years. As of May 8, 2012, the Santa Clarita Valley Sheriff’s Station has represented the history of law enforcement over a 40-year period, with storied tradition, pride, service, commitment and accomplishments. County of Los Angeles Fifth Supervisorial District County of Los Angeles Supervisor Michael D. Antonovich Representative Senior Field Deputy Rosalind Wayman City of Santa Clarita Mayor Frank Ferry Mayor Pro-Tem Bob Keller City Council Members TimBen Boydston, Marsha McLean, Laurene Weste City Manager Ken Pulskamp Assistant City Manager Ken Striplin The Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department has been providing law enforcement and temporary jail services for the residents of the Santa Clarita Valley for more than 150 years. In 1888, twelve years after the town of Newhall was established, the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors proposed the construction of a jail building on Spruce Street in Newhall. The jail was 12 feet by 20 feet and remained in use until 1906, when a new jail was built. In 1926, Newhall Substation #6 was established on San Fernando Road and served the entire northern portion of Los Angeles County. The station was manned 24 hours a day by two deputies. The total Newhall force originally included eight deputies. The Sheriff's Department fielded two patrol units for the area, and there was one resident deputy in Gorman. Twenty-one Sheriff’s Captains have had command of law enforcement services for this area dating back to 1932. The current station opened its doors on May 8, 1972, with Sheriff's Captain Edwin Coffeen officiating at the ceremony. Explorer scouts conducted tours of the station, which included demonstrations of expanded computerized record systems. The station now has more than 200 sworn staff members and nearly 50 professional staff. In addition, the station is home to more than 200 volunteers, including Sheriff’s explorers, patrol reserve deputies, mounted posse members, search and rescue, volunteers on patrol, station clerical staff, counter operations, and even community emergency response coordinators. The station is also supported by the Santa Clarita Sheriff’s Foundation, the Department’s Community Advisory Committee, city and county partners, and our incredible community. For more information, contact Deputy Jeffrey Jackson of the Santa Clarita Valley Sheriff’s Station at (661) 799-5159. Day of event questions: Sergeant Darren Harris (661) 510-1827. 
 Address/Location 
 LASD - Santa Clarita Valley Station, Los Angeles County Sheriff 
 26201 Golden Valley Rd Santa Clarita, CA 91350 
 Contact 
 Emergency: 9-1-1
 Non-emergencies: 661-260-4000
 Navigate & Discover 
 Enter a town, zip code or address 
 GO! 
 Message and data rates may apply. Message frequency varies. Terms and privacy .
 Company Overview 
 Contact 
 Careers 
 Terms of Service 
 Privacy Policy 
 FAQs 
 Powered by Nixle. © 2026 Everbridge, Inc.
