       Section 5.12
SHERIFF SERVICES
                                                                    Henry Mayo Newhall Memorial Hospital
                                                                   Master Plan Environmental Impact Report




5.12 SHERIFF SERVICES
This section provides an analysis of police services, which is based on information provided by the
Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department (Sheriff’s Department) and the California Highway Patrol
(CHP). The Sheriff’s Department maintains ultimate review and approval authority over aspects of
the proposed development that relate to police protection, and may identify further
recommendations and/or requirements.

5.12.1 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
LOS ANGELES COUNTY SHERIFF’S DEPARTMENT

The Santa Clarita Valley Station of the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department is responsible for
providing general law enforcement to the City of Santa Clarita through an on-going contract
between the two agencies. The contract between the City of Santa Clarita and the County of Los
Angeles is renewed annually and currently extends until June 2009. Funding for the Sheriff’s
Department in the City is provided by the City under the terms of the contract.

The Santa Clarita Valley Sheriff Station would be responsible for providing general law enforcement
to the project area. The Sheriff Station is located near the intersection of Magic Mountain Parkway
and Valencia Boulevard, at 23740 Magic Mountain Parkway in Valencia. The Sheriff Station
maintains a staff of 165 sworn deputies, and serves an area of 656 square miles and a population of
approximately 220,000 (including the City itself).1 The Sheriff’s Department has an ideal population
ratio of one deputy per 1,000 residents. With current staffing of 165 sworn deputies currently
assigned, the existing ratio is 1 deputy per 1,333 residents. Equipment and services provided to the
City include 24-hour designated County cars, helicopters, search and rescue, mounted posse, and
emergency operation centers.2

The Sheriff’s Department also conducts Search and Rescue operations through its Santa Clarita
Valley station. Search and Rescue operations conducted by the Sheriff’s Department are generally
conducted in mountainous terrain (i.e., downed aircraft or lost hikers). The Santa Clarita Station
Search and Rescue team uses the station’s helicopter and has access to the Antelope Valley station’s
helicopter. Mutual aid exists with other Search and Rescue teams located both within and outside of
Los Angeles County, and are organized through the State’s Office of Emergency Services. Search
and Rescue operations are funded through the Reserve Forces Bureau and private sources. Urban
search and rescue operations (i.e., rescues from building collapse), are performed by the County Fire
Department.

The performance goals for the police services program as outlined in the City’s 2007-2008 budget
include:




1   Per phone communications with Court Miller, Operations Sergeant, County of Los Angeles Sheriff’s Department, Santa Clarita
    Valley Station, September 5, 2007.
2   Per written communications with Patti A. Minutello, Captain of the Santa Clarita Valley Station, on March 3, 2004 and
    confirmed April 21, 2005.

Draft – September 2008                                  5.12-1                                            Sheriff Services
                                                                    Henry Mayo Newhall Memorial Hospital
                                                                   Master Plan Environmental Impact Report



    ♦ Work to maintain neighborhoods and business communities free from the blight of graffiti;
    ♦ Partner with the City to combat gang related and juvenile crimes with recreational
        opportunities, intervention strategies, and traditional enforcement, and make extensive use
        of the Teen Court and Community Court programs;
    ♦ Work to increase resident safety and awareness to prevent auto theft, car burglaries, and
        other crime; and
    ♦ Reduce collisions through officer enforcement and use of the red light photo enforcement
        program.

The Sheriff’s Department has established an optimal response time for services of 10 minutes or less
for emergency response incidents (a crime that is presently occurring and is a life or death situation),
20 minutes or less for priority incidents (a crime or incident that is currently occurring but which is
not a life or death situation) and 60 minutes or less for non-emergency responses (a crime that has
already occurred and is not a life or death situation).3 These response times represent the range of
time required to handle a service call, which is measured from the time a call is received until the
time a patrol car arrives at the incident scene. Response time is variable particularly because the
nearest responding patrol car may be located anywhere within the station’s patrol area, and not
necessarily responding from the station itself.

STATE EMERGENCY RESPONSE/EVACUATION PLANS

After the 1993 Oakland fire, the State of California passed legislation authorizing the State’s Office
of Emergency Services to prepare a Standard Emergency Management System (SEMS) program
which sets forth measures by which a jurisdiction handles emergency disasters. By December 1996,
each jurisdiction was required to show the Office of Emergency Services that it is in compliance
with SEMS through a number of measures, including having an up-to-date emergency management
plan, which would include an emergency evacuation plan. Non-compliance with SEMS can result in
the State withholding disaster relief from the non-complying jurisdiction in the event of an
emergency disaster.

The California Office of Emergency Services coordinates an emergency organizational network of
local Emergency Operations Centers (EOCs) in the State’s cities, regional EOCs within each county,
and the California Office of Emergency Services. The regional office of the California Office of
Emergency Services is located in Los Alamitos, and the Los Angeles County’s EOC is located in
downtown Los Angeles. The County Office of Emergency Management has prepared the County’s
Multi-Hazard Functional Plan, which details the coordination of County agencies during and after a
catastrophic event and establishes the framework for the mutual aid agreements with the CHP, and
Federal, State, and other local governments in the region. It also serves as the emergency
management plan (including emergency evacuation plan) for the entire County. The Los Angeles
County Board of Supervisors adopted a revised plan on February 17, 1998.




3   Per phone communications with Court Miller, Operations Sergeant, County of Los Angeles Sheriff’s Department, Santa Clarita
    Valley Station, September 5, 2007.

Draft – September 2008                                  5.12-2                                            Sheriff Services
                                                                  Henry Mayo Newhall Memorial Hospital
                                                                 Master Plan Environmental Impact Report



CITY EMERGENCY RESPONSE/EVACUATION PLANS

The City of Santa Clarita has prepared an SEMS, which is responsible for emergency operations
within City boundaries. The Santa Clarita City Manager is the Director of Emergency Services for
the City. The primary emergency operations center for the City of Santa Clarita is City Hall, located
at 23920 Valencia Boulevard. A secondary emergency operations center (should City Hall be
unavailable) is the Transit Maintenance Facility located at Constellation Road.4

The City of Santa Clarita serves as the EOC for the Santa Clarita Valley area. The Santa Clarita
EOC works in cooperation and coordination with local and regional offices of the California Office
of Emergency Services and the Los Angeles County Fire and Sheriff’s Departments to coordinate
community action in the event of a disaster, such as fire suppression, search and rescue, evacuation,
post-disaster safety inspections, and clean-up efforts in its service area, which includes the City of
Santa Clarita. The City’s EOC can be entirely self-sustaining during disaster operations.5

CALIFORNIA HIGHWAY PATROL

The California Highway Patrol (CHP) provides traffic regulation enforcement for unincorporated
Santa Clarita Valley and surrounding areas from its station located at 28648 The Old Road, near the
interchange of Interstate 5 and State Route 126. The CHP patrols a service area of approximately
700 square miles, which includes Interstate 5, State Route 126, State Route 14, and all
unincorporated areas and roadways. This service area extends westerly to the Ventura County line,
east to Agua Dulce, north to State Route 138 (and along State Route 138 to Avenue 22 East), and
south to State Route 118.

The primary responsibility of the CHP is to patrol State Highways and County roadways in the
previously identified service area, enforce traffic regulations, respond to traffic accidents, and to
provide service and assistance for disabled vehicles. The CHP also has a major role in the State’s
enhanced anti-terror activities.6 The CHP’s overall level of staffing is about 10,700 positions. The
department is comprised of uniformed (sworn) and non-uniformed (non-sworn) personnel, with
uniformed personnel accounting for approximately 7,300 positions, or 67 percent, of total staff.7

In the Santa Clarita Valley area, the CHP maintains a Mutual Aid Agreement with the Los Angeles
County Sheriff’s Department. The Newhall CHP area is staffed by 88 uniform and nine non-
uniform personnel.8 The Los Angeles and Orange County areas are served on a limited basis by a
helicopter and a fixed wing aircraft based out of Fullerton Airport.




4   Per information from the Riverpark Draft EIR, telephone interview with Donna Nuzzi, Emergency Services Coordinator, City
    of Santa Clarita, November 20, 2002.
5   Ibid.
6   Analysis of the 2006-2007 Budget Bill, Legislative Analyst’s Office, February 2006.
7   Ibid.
8   Officer Espizito, California Highway Patrol, Santa Clarita Valley Station, per phone conversation August 21, 2008.

Draft – September 2008                                 5.12-3                                            Sheriff Services
                                                           Henry Mayo Newhall Memorial Hospital
                                                          Master Plan Environmental Impact Report




5.12.2 SIGNIFICANCE THRESHOLD CRITERIA
The City of Santa Clarita Local CEQA Guidelines (Resolution 05-38) adopted on April 26, 2005, as
well as the City’s General Plan and Municipal Code serve as the basis for identifying thresholds
determining the significance of the environmental effects of a projects. Where thresholds are not
specifically identified, the Initial Study checklist contained in Appendix A of this EIR relating to
sheriff services and facilities have been utilized to formulate additional significance criteria in this
section. Accordingly, a project may create a significant environmental impact if the following
occurs:

    ♦ Substantial adverse physical impacts associated with the provision of new or expanded
        sheriff and highway patrol protection services or facilities, the construction of which could
        cause significant environmental impacts, in order to maintain acceptable service ratios,
        response times, or other performance objectives.

The proposed HMNMH Master Plan has been evaluated based on this standard. Mitigation
measures are recommended for potentially significant impacts. If a potentially significant impact
cannot be reduced to a less than significant level through the application of mitigation, it is
categorized as a significant unavoidable impact.

5.12.3 IMPACTS AND MITIGATION MEASURES
CONSTRUCTION-RELATED SHERIFF IMPACTS

Level of Significance Prior to Mitigation: Less Than Significant Impact.

Impact Analysis: During the construction of the proposed HMNMH Master Plan, Sheriff’s service
requirements on the project site have the potential to increase over existing demands as a result of
both increased persons and the presence of buildings and equipment on the project site.

The daytime population would increase due to the presence of construction workers on the project
site. This increase in the daytime population would vary due to the type of construction activities
being conducted (i.e., site grading, construction of structures, or infrastructure improvements).

There is a potential for increased calls for service to the project site as a result of the increased
number of persons at the project site. Due to the presence of building materials, construction
equipment, and related temporary office buildings, the potential for vandalism and theft is greater;
thereby, increasing Sheriff’s calls for service demands for property protection. The calls for Sheriff
service could be accommodated by existing staff levels; thus sheriff staffing levels would remain the
same, resulting in a less than significant impacts. To ensure that impacts remain at less than
significant levels, Mitigation Measure SS1 has been included that would require the hospital to
secure private on-site security service during construction of the proposed project.

Slow-moving construction-related traffic on adjacent roadways could reduce optimal traffic flows
and could impact sheriff services by delaying emergency vehicles traveling through the area.
However, construction-related traffic would not result in a significant impact on sheriff’s services or
traffic flows because Mitigation Measure SS2 limits construction-related traffic to occur only during

Draft – September 2008                           5.12-4                                 Sheriff Services
                                                             Henry Mayo Newhall Memorial Hospital
                                                            Master Plan Environmental Impact Report



off-peak hours, which would cease upon completion of construction. Therefore, construction-
related sheriff impacts would not result in an exceedance of the significance threshold criteria
identified above.

Mitigation Measures:

    SS1          During construction, private security patrols shall be utilized to protect the project
                 site.

    SS2          Construction-related traffic, including all off-site earthmoving operations, shall be
                 limited to between the hours of 9:00 AM and 2:00 PM in order to avoid weekday
                 peak traffic conditions.

Level of Significance After Mitigation: Less Than Significant Impact.

OPERATIONAL-RELATED SHERIFF IMPACTS

Level of Significance Prior to Mitigation: Potentially Significant Impact.

Impact Analysis: The County of Los Angeles Sheriff’s Department would have the responsibility to
provide general law enforcement, including traffic control and enforcement, for the project site
under the existing contract between the City and the County. While the proposed project would not
directly induce population growth, buildout out of the proposed HMNMH Master Plan would
generate employment and thereby indirectly increase the population within the City (refer to Section
5.2, Population and Employment). The population increase anticipated with implementation of the
project is consistent with growth forecasts. As service levels needs increase due to increased
population or other factors affecting the community, the terms of the City’s contract is evaluated to
determine whether additional Sheriff staff would be needed. Payment of Police Facility Fees, as
required under Mitigation Measure SS8, would be used to help pay for additional needed facilities
associated with build out of the community.

Potential impacts to Sheriff services could arise as a result of project design, landscape materials, and
building orientation. However, with the incorporation of safety design techniques into the project
design (refer to Mitigation Measures SS3 through SS8) and payment of applicable fees, potentially
significant security impacts to persons and property would be reduced to a less than significant level.
Therefore, operational-related sheriff impacts would not result in an exceedance of the significance
threshold criteria identified above.

Mitigation Measures:

    SS3          As final site and building plans are submitted to the City for approval in the future,
                 Sheriff’s Department design requirements which reduce demands for service and
                 ensure adequate public safety (such as those pertaining to site access, site security
                 lighting), shall be incorporated into building designs.




Draft – September 2008                             5.12-5                                Sheriff Services
                                                           Henry Mayo Newhall Memorial Hospital
                                                          Master Plan Environmental Impact Report



    SS4         Project design shall landscape the project site with low-growing groundcover and
                shade trees, rather than a predominance of shrubs that could conceal potential
                criminal activity around buildings and parking areas.

    SS5         Project design shall provide lighting around and throughout the development to
                enhance crime prevention and enforcement efforts.

    SS6         Project design shall provide clearly visible (during the day and night) address signs
                and/or building numbers for easy identification during emergencies.

    SS7         Project design shall provide visibility of doors and windows from the street and
                between buildings.

    SS8         Concurrent with the issuance of building permits, the project applicant shall
                participate in the Police Facility Fee Program to the satisfaction of the City of Santa
                Clarita.

Level of Significance After Mitigation: Less Than Significant Impact.

EMERGENCY RESPONSE/EVACUATION PLANS

Level of Significance Prior to Mitigation: Less Than Significant Impact.

Impact Analysis: The City’s Emergency Preparedness Plan (Plan) details the City’s specific
responsibilities before, during and after an emergency. The Plan is in compliance with the State
Emergency Services Plan. The proposed development would not impair or physically interfere with
the Plan. The Plan does not identify any emergency access routes, however, McBean Parkway is a
major arterial through the City and provides access to Interstate 5 for emergency evacuation.
Additionally, it is anticipated that traffic flow would be temporarily impacted along McBean Parkway
during construction of the proposed HMNMH Master Plan. With implementation of Mitigation
Measure SS2, construction-related traffic would be limited to off-peak hours, and this impact would
cease upon completion of construction. Any street closures or temporary obstruction would be
subject to all emergency access standards and requirements, and/or reviewed by the Los Angeles
County Fire Department, thus, reducing impacts to a less than significant level. Impacts in this
regard would not result in an exceedance of the significance threshold criteria.

Mitigation Measures:   Refer to Mitigation Measure SS2.          No additional mitigation measures are
required.

Level of Significance After Mitigation: Less Than Significant Impact.

CALIFORNIA HIGHWAY PATROL (CHP) SERVICES

Level of Significance Prior to Mitigation: Less Than Significant Impact.

Impact Analysis: Upon buildout of the proposed HMNMH Master Plan, demands for CHP services
on the I-5 freeway and at the I-5/McBean Parkway on- and off-ramps would increase due to


Draft – September 2008                           5.12-6                                 Sheriff Services
                                                           Henry Mayo Newhall Memorial Hospital
                                                          Master Plan Environmental Impact Report



vehicular traffic generated by the project. According to Caltrans’ Guide for the Preparation of Traffic
Impact Studies, project volumes that result in less than 100 peak hour trips, as well as freeway
conditions that do not exhibit noticeable delay, do not require preparation of freeway mainline
traffic studies. The traffic study prepared for the project evaluated I-5, north and south of McBean
Parkway and determined that project volumes are less than 100 trips during peak hours. In addition,
this section of the I-5 freeway was the subject of a recent Caltrans study which demonstrated that
with planned construction of truck climbing lanes and HOV lanes, the freeway will operate at
acceptable levels of service for future cumulative conditions that include the project’s traffic.
Through increased revenues generated by the proposed project, funding for additional staffing and
equipment would be available to the CHP and would be allocated by the State CHP office to the
Santa Clarita Valley Station to meet future demands. Based on the CHP’s anticipation to maintain
this same level of service, no significant project-related impacts on CHP services are anticipated. As
such, CHP impacts would not result in an exceedance of the significance threshold criteria identified
above and impacts would be less than significant.

Mitigation Measures: No mitigation measures are required.

Level of Significance After Mitigation: Less Than Significant Impact.

5.12.4 CUMULATIVE IMPACTS AND MITIGATION
       MEASURES
SHERIFF AND CALIFORNIA HIGHWAY PATROL SERVICES

Level of Significance Prior to Mitigation: Less Than Significant Impact.

Impact Analysis: Cumulative population growth attributable to the proposed project and related
projects would decrease the existing level of service of the Sheriff’s Department in the City and
unincorporated areas in the Santa Clarita Valley. However, as the proposed project and related
projects are developed, tax revenues from property and sales taxes would be generated and accrued
by the City of Santa Clarita and Los Angeles County, as applicable. A portion of these revenues
would then be allocated, in accordance with the City of Santa Clarita and County of Los Angeles
contractual service agreement, to maintain staffing and equipment levels for the Santa Clarita Valley
Sheriff’s Substation in response to related demands. Although the proposed project and related
projects would increase demands for Sheriff’s services, these service demands can be met through
the allocation of revenues collected from the cumulative project developments using existing
sources. Therefore, no significant impacts are anticipated.

Increased revenues generated by the proposed project and related projects via motor vehicle
registration fees paid by new on-site residents and businesses would provide funding for additional
staffing and equipment for the CHP that could be allocated by the State CHP office to the Santa
Clarita Valley Station to meet future demands. Based on the CHP’s anticipation to maintain the
same level of service, no significant cumulative impacts on CHP services are anticipated. Therefore,
cumulative sheriff and CHP impacts would not result in an exceedance of the significance threshold
criteria identified above.



Draft – September 2008                           5.12-7                                Sheriff Services
                                                           Henry Mayo Newhall Memorial Hospital
                                                          Master Plan Environmental Impact Report



Mitigation Measures: No mitigation measures are required.

Level of Significance After Mitigation: Less Than Significant Impact.

EMERGENCY RESPONSE/EVACUATION PLANS

Level of Significance Prior to Mitigation: Less Than Significant Impact.

Impact Analysis: The resident and daytime populations of the cumulative project sites would increase
above current levels upon buildout of the proposed project and related projects. These populations
would be subject to potential emergencies (e.g., earthquake, fire, etc.). However, all development
projects in the Santa Clarita Valley are subject to review and approval by the Los Angeles County
Fire Department, which requires that, among other conditions, adequate access exists for emergency
vehicles. Given that the proposed project and related cumulative projects would be required to
provide adequate emergency vehicle access, cumulative development would not adversely affect or
prevent implementation of any emergency response or evacuation plans. As such, impacts would be
less than significant in this regard and would not exceed the significance threshold criteria identified
above.

Mitigation Measures: No mitigation measures are required.

Level of Significance After Mitigation: Less Than Significant Impact.

5.12.5 SIGNIFICANT UNAVOIDABLE IMPACTS
With imposition of the required mitigation measures, implementation of the proposed project would
result in less than significant project impacts related to sheriff protection and California Highway
Patrol services and facilities during both construction and operation. All other identified impacts
were concluded to be at less than significant levels, and did not require mitigation. As such, no
significant unavoidable impacts would result from implementation of the Henry Mayo Newhall
Memorial Hospital Master Plan.




Draft – September 2008                           5.12-8                                 Sheriff Services
