SCVHistory.com LW3758 | Rancho Camulos | ''Ramona's Bedroom at Camulos,'' Souvenir Postcard, ~1915. > RANCHO CAMULOS: DEL VALLE PERIOD "Ramona's Bedroom at Camulos" Rancho Camulos Click image to enlarge | Download archival scan Souvenir postcard: "Ramona's Bedroom at Camulos," published by Thomas P. Getz of North San Diego, probably in 1915 when he published other "Ramona"-related postcards . The bedroom is located at the southeast corner of the Del Valle family's 1853 adobe hacienda-style home at Rancho Camulos. Mary Pickford is inside "Ramona's Bedroom" looking out at Rancho Camulos in the 1910 film version. Click to enlarge. Getz was the author of "The Story of Ramona's Marriage Place: Old San Diego, California" (~1900). The postcard was originally sold by Ramona's Marriage Place (see below), i.e., Casa de Estudillo (the 1827 Estudillo House), which is now part of Old Town San Diego State Historic Park. In 1915, its owner was John D. Spreckels, developer of the Hotel Del Coronado and owner of an electric railway. (His father was the sugar magnate.) J.D. Spreckels purchased the Estudillo House in 1906, restored it by 1910, and turned it into a tourist attraction as "Ramona's Marriage Place," capitalizing on Helen Hunt Jackson's 1884 novel, which was still wildly popular and frequently republished. Today the Estudillo House is one of three "Ramona"-related National Historic Landmarks, the others being Rancho Camulos — the "Home of Ramona" at the west end of the historic Rancho San Francisco (SCV) — and Rancho Guajome in the present Vista, San Diego County. Cave Couts, a slaveholder from Tennessee and brother-in-law of L.A. merchant Abel Stearns (by Couts' marriage to Ysidora Bandini, a Californio), used Indian slave labor ( Akins & Bauer 2021 :141-142) to build the adobe at Guajome about the same time the Del Valles were building theirs at Camulos. In D.W. Griffiths' 1910 cinematic version of "Ramona" for Biograph, Mary Pickford, as the title character, gazes forlornly out the window of "Ramona's Bedroom at Camulos." A different (and better) publication of the same postcard image appears below. Click image to enlarge | Download archival scan LW3758: 9600 dpi jpeg from original postcard purchased 2020 by Leon Worden. LW2234 (bottom image): Needs rescan. RANCHO CAMULOS POSTCARDS Private Mailing Card 1898-1901 1901-1907 from 1886 Brewster Photo Leather 1907 Home of Ramona x5 Courtyard Spanish Fandango Upper Porch Mission Bells Chapel Altar Olive Mill Sheep Shearing Ramona's Garden Ramona's Bedroom ~1915 Cemetery ~1915 "Ramona at Camulos" (Not) ~1909 [ RETURN TO TOP ] [ RETURN TO MAIN INDEX ] [ PHOTO CREDITS ] [ BIBLIOGRAPHY ] [ BOOKS FOR SALE ] SCVHistory.com is another service of SCVTV, a 501c3 Nonprofit • Site contents ©SCVTV The site owner makes no assertions as to ownership of any original copyrights to digitized images. However, these images are intended for Personal or Research use only. Any other kind of use, including but not limited to commercial or scholarly publication in any medium or format, public exhibition, or use online or in a web site, may be subject to additional restrictions including but not limited to the copyrights held by parties other than the site owner. USERS ARE SOLELY RESPONSIBLE for determining the existence of such rights and for obtaining any permissions and/or paying associated fees necessary for the proposed use. Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus. comments powered by Disqus
