NorthLake Specific Plan Draft Supplemental EIR R:ProjectsOCWCP_WoodridJ0001Draft EIR5.3 Cultural Resources-042617.docx 5 . 3 - 5 Cultural Resources reaching the upper Santa Clara River in the Newhall-Saugus area and camping briefly as they continued west toward Ventura. In 1772, Pedro Fages, a soldier searching for Spanish deserters, traveled through the Antelope Valley and into the San Joaquin Valley via the Tejon Pass. In 1776, Friar Francisco Garcés arrived in the Newhall-Saugus area and turned northward, following lower Castaic Creek and Elizabeth Lake Canyon to reach the Antelope Valley. Three of the 21 Franciscan missions established by the Spanish in Alta California impacted Tataviam people profoundly: Mission San Gabriel Arcángel (1771), Mission San Fernando Rey de España (1797), and Mission San Buenaventura (1782). An asistencia (outlying chapel and granary) of Mission San Fernando was established in 1802 along the upper Santa Clara River. In 1820, Friar Mariano Payéras, Presidente of the California missions, reported to Spain that a mission should be established on the Santa Clara River in the Newhall area, referring to the location as Cajon de los Difuntos because native people had killed two Spanish soldiers there. However, the rebellion in Mexico against Spain was already under way, and Payéras received no support for his campaign to establish additional missions in California’s interior. Mexico’s independence from Spain in 1822 brought the Mexican Period to California. Mexico secularized the missions, but continued the Spanish practice of granting large tracts of ranch land to soldiers, civil servants, and pioneers. The Project site is not located within any grant. The land grant nearest the Project site was the 13,339-acre Rancho Temescal (or Temascal ), located just 1.25 miles to the west at its nearest point. Temescal was granted to Francisco Lopez and Jose Arellanes in 1843 by Manuel Micheltorena, one of several Mexican governors of Alta California. The ranch was patented by the United States in 1871, but little is known of historic developments there. Located 2.5 miles to the southeast at its nearest point, the massive 48,612-acre Rancho San Francisco was granted in 1839 to Antonio del Valle, a Spanish lieutenant, by Governor Juan Bautista Alvarado. Rancho San Francisco became popularly known as Rancho de Valle and is designated as California Historical Landmark No. 556. On March 9, 1842, gold was discovered on the great ranch in Placerita Canyon by Francisco López, six years before the famous discovery at Sutter’s Mill that unleashed the California Gold Rush. López is said to have dreamed about finding the gold, and an oak tree growing at the spot came to be known as “Oak of the Golden Dream”, which is now designated as California Historical Landmark No. 168. Anglo-Americans began to explore Alta California as early as 1826, when trapper Jedediah Smith arrived at Mission San Gabriel. Mountain men James Ohio Pattie and Ewing Young passed through the Upper Santa Clara River Valley during the early 1830s. Preceding an American challenge for the California territory, John C. Fremont’s topographical engineers began to survey the region for the United States during the 1840s. Before long, the Mexican-American War broke out, with Fremont in command of the California Battalion for the United States. Fremont’s battalion marched through the Santa Clara River Valley and south to Mission San Fernando; the hostilities ended there on January 13, 1847, and the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo was signed on February 2, 1848. The transition was more apparent in 1850, when the new State of California was apportioned into 27 original counties, including Los Angeles County. The Gold Rush created a need for roads between the mining camps and major trade centers of San Francisco and Los Angeles. Early in 1855, shipping pioneer Phineas Banning blazed a wagon road north from Los Angeles to the newly established Fort Tejon, opening direct freight service between the growing business center, the Mojave Desert, and southern Kern County. The arduous route was improved in 1862 when a deep passageway was cut through an intervening ridge. Known as Beale’s Cut, the feature is located in the Newhall area and is designated as California Historical Landmark No. 1006. In 1858, the Butterfield transcontinental stage line began
