Tesoro del Valle (Phases A, B, C) Draft Supplemental EIR R:ProjectsBLC3BLC000100Draft EIR5.5 Cultural.docx 5 . 5 - 5 Section 5.5 Cultural Resources The ranch was patented by the United States in 1871, but little is known of historic developments there. Located 2.5 miles to the southeast at its nearest point, the massive 48,612-acre Rancho San Francisco was granted in 1839 to Antonio del Valle, a Spanish Lieutenant, by Governor Juan Bautista Alvarado. Rancho San Francisco became popularly known as Rancho de Valle and is designated California Historical Landmark No. 556. On March 9, 1842, gold was discovered on the great ranch in Placerita Canyon by Francisco Lopez, six years before the famous discovery at Sutter’s Mill that unleashed the Gold Rush. Lopez is said to have dreamed about finding the gold, and an oak growing at the spot came to be known as “Oak of the Golden Dream”, now designated California Historical Landmark No. 168. Anglo-Americans began to explore Alta California as early as 1826, when trapper Jedediah Smith arrived at Mission San Gabriel. Mountain men James Ohio Pattie and Ewing Young passed through the Upper Santa Clara River Valley during the early 1830s. Preceding an American challenge for the California territory, John C. Fremont’s topographical engineers began to survey the region for the United States during the 1840s. Before long, the Mexican-American War broke out, with Fremont in command of the California Battalion for the United States. Fremont’s battalion marched through the Santa Clara River Valley and south to Mission San Fernando, where the hostilities ended on January 13, 1847, with the Treaty of Cahuenga. The American Period followed with Mexico’s concession of Alta California to the United States under the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo on February 2, 1848. The transition was more apparent in 1850, when the new State of California was apportioned into 27 original Counties, including Los Angeles County. The Gold Rush created a need for roads between the mining camps and major trade centers of San Francisco and Los Angeles. Early in 1855, shipping pioneer Phineas Banning blazed a wagon road north from Los Angeles to the newly established Fort Tejon, opening direct freight service among the growing business center, the Mojave Desert, and southern Kern County. The arduous route was improved in 1862 when a deep passageway was cut through an intervening ridge. Known as Beale’s Cut, the feature is located in the Newhall area and designated California Historical Landmark No. 1006. In 1858, the Butterfield transcontinental stage line began to utilize Banning’s road. The route followed San Francisquito Canyon rather than the steep grade north of Castaic presently used for Old Route 99/Interstate 5. During the winter of 1861–1862, relentless rains in Southern California produced catastrophic floods that washed away buildings, crops, and livestock by the thousands. The floods were followed by two years of catastrophic drought that dealt another crippling blow to crops and livestock. Land values fell dramatically, and most ranchers were forced to sell their holdings. The crisis opened the door to speculators and entrepreneurs from the East Coast who envisioned profitable new developments on cheap land. One of these was Thomas A. Scott of the Pennsylvania Railroad. Scott sent Thomas Bard to California to purchase land in the quest for oil, and Bard purchased Rancho San Francisco in 1865. The enterprise was unsuccessful, and Bard sold Rancho San Francisco to rancher Henry Mayo Newhall in 1875. Oil speculation in the region, however, continued at a brisk pace as discoveries were made in other locations. On September 6, 1876, the Southern Pacific Railroad was completed through Soledad Canyon and crossed Newhall’s Rancho San Francisco along the upper Santa Clara River. The golden spike driven at Lang Station represented a critical link among Los Angeles, Northern California, and transcontinental routes to the east. The site of Lang Station is designated California Historical Landmark No. 590. A station aptly named Newhall was established on October 28, 1876, but was renamed Saugus two years later when the original name was transferred to a new station constructed two miles to the south. A small depot was constructed at Castaic Junction a few years later in 1887.
