codeLawSectionNoHead">Elections Code - ELECDIVISION 10. LOCAL, SPECIAL, VACANCY, AND CONSOLIDATED ELECTIONS [10000 - 10735]  ( Division 10 enacted by Stats. 1994, Ch. 920, Sec. 2. )  PART 4. UNIFORM DISTRICT ELECTION LAW [10500 - 10556]  ( Part 4 enacted by Stats. 1994, Ch. 920, Sec. 2. )  10502.  (a) This part shall apply to all districts and agencies whose principal acts so provide. However, the provisions of this part requiring the county elections official to conduct elections shall apply to all resident voting districts and agencies, and, at the discretion of the county elections official, may apply to landowner voting districts, notwithstanding any other provision of law.
(b) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), the county elections official shall conduct an election on
				behalf of a landowner voting district if the governing body of the district, by resolution, requests that assistance and agrees to reimburse the county pursuant to Section 10520 and any county ordinances or resolutions consistent therewith. A district making that request shall supply information regarding qualified voters pursuant to Section 10525, and any other pertinent information requested by the county elections official. The election may be conducted by all-mailed ballots at the discretion of the county elections official. The election may not be held on the same date as a regularly scheduled election. The county elections official may rely upon the list of qualified voters and other information supplied by the district and shall not be required to determine the qualified voters. If the district does not supply the required information regarding qualified voters and other pertinent information requested by the county elections official within the time specified in Section 10525, the county elections
				official shall have no further obligation with respect to the election, and the district shall be responsible for conducting all remaining election activities.
(c) Where this part conflicts with the principal act, this part shall apply and control.
(d) This part shall not apply to the election of elective officers of the district upon formation of the district, except as to the term of office of the officers.
(Enacted by Stats. 1994, Ch. 920, Sec. 2.)