



	•	HOME
	•	NEWS
	•	SPORTS
	•	COMMUNITY
	•	BUSINESS
	•	OPINION
	•	PHOTOS
	•	VIDEO
	•	SPECIAL SECTIONS
Newhall Governing Board elects new president, clerk
4 hours agoAdd CommentChristina Cox

From left to right, Newhall School District Governing Board President Philip Ellis and Clerk Brian Walters. Courtesy Photos

Christina Cox
_ChristinaCox_
Add Comment
	•	 Share This!

4
SHARES
ShareTweetSubscribe

Get breaking news and local stories in your inbox!
* indicates required

Email Address *

First Name

Last Name

Newsletters
	•	 Weekday Local News Emails
	•	 Promotions and Contests



The Newhall School District elected Philip Ellis its new president and Brian Walters its new clerk at its annual organizational meeting Tuesday.
This is the third time Ellis, first elected in November 1995, will serve as president of the district’s Governing Board.  In the past, he also served as president of the William S. Hart Union High School District Governing Board.
“It’s something I’ve been doing for a long time and something I enjoy, I love being able to give back to the elementary school district,” Ellis said.
This year, Ellis said the board hope to continue the success and achievements of students and staff the Newhall School District.
“As a board we want to continue on with our excellent results with our education,” Ellis said.  “I also want to see the final opening of our theater, which will hopefully be early next year… It will be a jewel when it’s done.”
During his previous terms as president of the Newhall School District Governing Board, Ellis helped the district Measure K.  The bond measure was used to renovate older schools and build new schools, and ultimately end the district’s year-round, multi-track schedule.
He then served a four-year term on the Hart Governing Board, where he helped pass Measure V for facility renovations, before returning to the Newhall Governing Board in November 2009.
In addition to his position on the Governing Board, Ellis works as an in-house bank counsel or several banks in the Los Angeles area.
He also is a member of the Santa Clarita Valley Family YMCA Board of Managers, where he chairs both the Child Care Committee and Board Development Committee, and acts as chair of the Newhall Redevelopment Committee.
Brian Walters
This is the second time Walters, first appointed in December 2009, will serve as clerk of the board.  In the past he also served as the board’s president.
“It’s always a great opportunity to serve on the board,” Walters said.  “It’s a great way to support the work we’re doing on the board.”
He credits the success of the board to the longevity of several of its members, who have worked together for nearly nine years.
“It’s amazing to have that longevity together,” Walters said.  “We all have different viewpoints, but ultimately we have the desire to take care of our kids and make sure they’re all successful.”
Walters said he also hopes the board continues its work to make the district successful, while addressing challenges like declining enrollment and adjusting to the Dashboard.
“We’ve had a lot of retirements recently, so [our goal is to] help continue building that institutional culture that is Newhall School District with our administrators,” he said.  “We just began implementing our new curriculum so to be able to take that curriculum that we’ve used and push forward of it.”
In addition to his position on the Governing Board, Walters works as vice president and general counsel for Cash Technologies, Inc. and Prime Asset Fund III, LLC.
He is an active member of the Pico Canyon PTA and Pico Canyon All Pro Dads, serves as a Boy Scout adult leader and acts as a coach for youth baseball, basketball and soccer.
ccox@signalscv.com 661-287-5575 On Twitter as @_ChristinaCox_
You may also like

Newhall Board to review district’s budget
December 11, 2017, 3:00 pm

NSD to provide students with home access to technology, internet
December 11, 2017, 2:03 pm

UPDATE: No school closures planned Wednesday for Rye Fire
December 5, 2017, 12:31 pm

Newhall Board to discuss district’s Arts for All Plan
November 27, 2017, 12:19 pm

Meadows Elementary honors local veterans
November 15, 2017, 4:43 pm

NSD to hold annual ‘State of the District’ meeting
October 23, 2017, 10:05 am
About the author

VIEW ALL POSTS

Christina Cox
Christina Cox is a multimedia journalist covering education, community and breaking news in the Santa Clarita Valley. She joined The Signal as a staff writer in August 2016.




Latest Stories

Santa Clarita Ballet performs ‘The Nutcracker’ for students
59 mins ago

Santa Clarita touts contributions from DFY in SCV community campaign
3 hours ago

Robbery suspects allegedly stole shrimp and beer
4 hours ago

Newhall Governing Board elects new president, clerk
4 hours ago

Council passes parking fee for Old Town Newhall
6 hours ago














26330 Diamond Place, St. 100-200 Santa Clarita, CA, 91350
Main Desk: 661-259-1234 Newsroom: 661-255-1234 Advertising: 661-287-5557
Have a news tip? Let us know!
© 2017 The Santa Clarita Valley Signal

