
Planning Commission - City of Santa Clarita
Skip to content
Departments
Services
Planning Commission
Home
 » 
Commission Information
 » 
Planning Commission
Menu
The five-member Planning Commission 
meets on the first and third Tuesday of the month, at 6:00 p.m. 
in the City Council Chambers. (Planning Commission Meetings are broadcast live on SCV TV channel 20 and on the City’s Website.) Members of the public wishing to address the commission may do so by completing a speaker’s slip upon arrival at the meeting. There is a three minute time limit per person.
Meetings are held in the City Council Chambers, 1st floor of City Hall, 23920 Valencia Blvd., Santa Clarita, CA. ( 
view map 
) For more information, contact the Planning Division at (661) 255-4330.
Agendas & Minutes
Patsy Ayala, Vice-Chairperson
Term Expires: December 2026
Patsy has been a resident of Santa Clarita since 2000. She has ample experience in the public sector working with members of the California Assembly and California Senate. In the private sector, she gained experience with international corporations at General Electric Aircraft Engines, where she helped to start the operation of a high-tech engineering center.
Patsy has contributed extensively to the legislative process in the State of California working on issues such as high-speed rail, the environment, water, sanitation, safety and other legislative areas. She acted on behalf of state legislators for government affairs, legislative work and creating opportunities to serve the constituents and navigate the State of California’s agencies. She managed emergency crisis cases like the Aliso Canyon Gas Leak and COVID-19 concerns, such as unemployment and safety protocols.
Patsy has also been an active member of the community. She has served as a leader in the Latino community and played a key role in numerous civic and educational organizations, including boards and committees for the Santa Clarita Valley Chamber of Commerce Latino Business Alliance & Government Affairs Council, Hispanic Chamber of Commerce, Valley Industry Association, Saugus Union School District, William S. Hart Union High School District and College of the Canyons. Over the years, she has received commendations and awards for her involvement in the community, including being named the 21st Senatorial District Woman of the Year in 2013.
Patsy has a bachelor’s degree in Computer Systems Management. She also has certificates of study through Coursera in Politics from Yale University and Marketing from The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania.
Nathan Keith, Chairperson
Term Expires: December 2028
Nathan Keith is an experienced professional with over 18 years in land planning, entitlements, conservation, environmental impact assessments, CEQA, land use and zoning policy and master-planned community development. Since joining Tejon Ranch Company in 2007, Nathan has worked through various roles, ultimately becoming the Senior Vice President of Real Estate, where he now oversees the entitlements for one of the company’s master-planned communities. Beyond his leadership role at Tejon Ranch, Nathan is actively involved in Southern California’s business and real estate communities. He serves on several boards, including the Los Angeles County Business Federation, the Building Industry Association of Southern California and the Building Industry Association of Los Angeles/Ventura Chapter, where he is honored to serve as the 2025 President. Originally from Seattle, Nathan moved to Santa Clarita in 2001 to attend The Master’s University, where he graduated in 2004. He has called Santa Clarita home ever since. Nathan and his wife, Christine, have been married for 19 years and are the proud parents of four children. Together, they lead a busy life supporting their kids’ various activities and cheering them on at their soccer games. Outside of work and family life, Nathan enjoys the outdoors, often exploring Santa Clarita’s trails or Tejon Ranch with his German Shorthaired Pointer, Callie.
Daniel Faina, Vice-Chairperson
Term Expires: December 2026
Daniel Faina is a seasoned leader in the real estate, development and homebuilding industries, bringing nearly two decades of experience driving growth and innovation. He currently serves as President of Williams & Watt Incorporated and Williams Rebuild, focusing on rebuilding homes for families who lost everything in the Eaton and Palisades Fires. Since joining Williams Homes in 2007, Daniel has advanced through key leadership roles—including Chief Marketing Officer and Division President—where he helped position the company as a top-ranked builder of new home communities and multi-family residential properties across California, Montana and Idaho. In addition to his professional achievements, Daniel is actively involved in the community through board service with the Building Industry Association, the Santa Clarita Valley Economic Development Corporation and the Henry Mayo Newhall Hospital Foundation. He and his wife, Katarina, live in Valencia, where they are raising their two children and enthusiastically supporting them in both dance and sports.
Tim Burkhart, Commissioner
Term Expires: December 2028
Tim Burkhart serves as the Chairperson of the Santa Clarita Planning Commission, bringing over 40 years of experience in theme and water park operations. As the retired Corporate Vice President of Maintenance and Construction for Six Flags, he oversaw the maintenance and construction functions for all 26 Six Flags parks in North America and played a vital role in the development of new international parks in Saudi Arabia, Dubai, China and Mexico. His vast experience in large-scale infrastructure and operational management makes him a valuable asset to the Planning Commission. A longtime resident of Santa Clarita, Tim graduated from William S. Hart High School, attended College of the Canyons, and earned both Bachelor’s and Master’s degrees from California State University, Northridge. He has dedicated over 20 years to serving on the Planning Commission, helping to shape the City’s long-term growth and sustainability. Beyond his service to the commission, Tim is an avid cyclist and an active member of the Santa Clarita Valley Trail Users, where he volunteers regularly to build and maintain trails. His leadership extends to several community and business organizations, including the Santa Clarita Valley Economic Development Corporation, the Valley Industry Association and the California Association of Parks and Attractions. Through his extensive professional background and community involvement, Tim plays a critical role in ensuring that Santa Clarita’s development aligns with the City’s vision for the future.
Pamela Verner, Commissioner
Term Expires: December 2026
Pamela Verner is a licensed Real Estate Broker with over 30 years of experience in the real estate industry, specializing in commercial real estate in the Santa Clarita Valley for over 17 years. She has been a resident of Santa Clarita since 1981 and lives in Saugus with her husband, Dennis, and their two sons. Pamela currently sits on the Executive Board of Directors for the Boys & Girls Club of Santa Clarita Valley and Circle of Hope Cancer Support Center. She also represents Circle of Hope on the VIA (Valley Industry Association) board of directors. Pamela is actively involved in the nonprofit community, chairing numerous fundraisers and volunteering on committees. Her experience in real estate, community service and leadership adds valuable insight to the Planning Commission.
Lisa Eichman, Commissioner
Term Expires: December 2026 
Lisa Eichman has been a dedicated member of the Planning Commission since October 2010, bringing over a decade of experience in city planning and governance. A resident of Valencia since 1986, Lisa and her family chose Santa Clarita for its strong sense of community and excellent schools. She is a co-owner and founding partner of Eichman & Eichman, Tax and Accounting, and also owns Gymnastics Unlimited, the largest and longest-standing gymnastics school in Santa Clarita, with her husband Craig. In addition to her professional endeavors, Lisa actively contributes to the local community through various leadership roles. She serves on the Board of Directors for multiple organizations, including All Valley Le Tip (as current President), the Gymnastics Unlimited Foundation (as CFO) and the Foundation for US Historical Monuments (as Treasurer and Founding Board Member). Her passion for supporting individuals with disabilities is evident in her role as the Head Coach of the Santa Clarita Special Olympics Rhythmic Gymnastics team. Lisa’s background in finance, business ownership and community service provides her with a well-rounded perspective on development, economic growth and the importance of maintaining Santa Clarita’s family-friendly environment.
Denise Lite, Vice-Chairperson
Term Expires: December 2026 
Denise Lite is a legal professional with 27 years of experience in interpreting and applying the law, making her a pivotal asset to the Planning Commission. As the Managing Partner at DaCorsi Placencio, P.C., a civil litigation and family law firm, Denise has extensive knowledge of legal frameworks, contracts, real estate and compliance. Her background provides the Planning Commission with years of valuable legal expertise.
She has served on the Boards for Single Mothers Outreach, Soroptimist International of Valencia and the Santa Clarita Valley Chamber of Commerce. She is an avid fundraiser for breast cancer patients and programs and is proud to call Santa Clarita home.
