DRY RUN
PARENT collection "L.A. Mayor's Saugus State Prison Plan Fans Flames of Cityhood, 1985": create; kind topic; legacy URL /scvhistory/sg110185.htm (from #28295); webmaster's note 4 paragraphs; credit: News reports courtesy of Tricia Lemon Putnam.
   | It was the perfect setup for The Signal's firebreathing editorialist: L.A. Mayor Tom Bradley decided he'd meet L.A.'s obligation to host a s...
   | Modern conspiracists might assume it was a farce cooked up by our humble valley's would-be city creators to rally support for self-rule. Ind...
   | But it was real.
   | And it did die. But not before it joined the litany of mistreatments that prompted the fine people of Santa Clarita to grab the bull by the ...
CHILD 1 (Editorial): "The Tom Bradley Memorial Prison (Scott Newhall, The Signal, November 1, 1985)" create | Scott Newhall, Editor. | 14 paragraphs | writtenBy #31431
   first: In the normal scheme of things Los Angeles Mayors are not welcome in civilized, well-behaved communities. Cust
   last:  nsformed into a holding pen for the overflow scraps from Tom Bradley's municipal abattoir.
CHILD 2: "Bradley: Build Big House Here (Lauren Kay, The Signal, November 1, 1985)" create | By Lauren Kay. | 28 paragraphs
   first: Mayor Tom Bradley on Thursday stood on the grounds of the abandoned and decaying Saugus Rehabilitation Center 
   last:  At this point, however, he said Crown Coach is the only site being considered.
CHILD 3: "Convoluted Chronology Of 'Prison That Would Not Die.' (Joseph Kehoe, The Signal, November 1, 1985)" create | By Joseph Kehoe. | 34 paragraphs
   first: Today is known as Day of the Dead in some parts of the world.
   last:  the Department of Corrections scurrying to find yet another list of possible prison sites.
CHILD 4: "Legislators Lambaste Mayor's Prison Plan (Laurel Suomisto, The Signal, November 1, 1985)" create | By Laurel Suomisto. | 19 paragraphs
   first: The Santa Clarita Valley's elected leaders yesterday angrily attacked Los Angeles Mayor Tom Bradley's proposal
   last:  ld lead the fight against the plan, and urged homeowners to write the governor in protest.
CHILD 5: "Does L.A. Own the Land? (Ruth Newhall, The Signal, November 1, 1985)" create | By Ruth Newhall. | 16 paragraphs | writtenBy #15477
   first: It is very possible that Mayor Tom Bradley is trying to give away land that does not belong to him — or to the
   last:  this material came to light, so inspection of the records had to be postponed until today.
CHILD 6: "City Backers Join Prison Furor (Karina Lutz, The Signal, November 1, 1985)" #28295 (kept; legacy URL and webmaster note move to the parent) | By Karina Lutz. | 9 paragraphs
   first: Santa Clarita Valley city hood advocates had their own reaction to the news from the big city down south yeste
   last:  osal at its next public meeting, at 7:30 Monday evening in the Hart High School cafeteria.
CHILD 7: "Schools Chiefs React with Shock, Anger (Simon-Jacques Ifergan, The Signal, November 1, 1985)" create | By Simon-Jacques Ifergan. | 24 paragraphs
   first: To say the least, Mayor Tom Bradley's proposal caught everyone by surprise in this valley.
   last:  reality, he would like "to see the inclusion of a prison in the ministries of our church."
CHILD 8: "Reaction to Plan to Put Prison at Saugus: Cityhood Rally Shows Surge in Interest (Thomas Omestad, Los Angeles Times, November 5, 1985)" create | By Thomas Omestad. | 14 paragraphs
   first: Two weeks ago, the embryonic drive to forge a city from the unincorporated communities of the Santa Clarita Va
   last:  Incorporation could be voted on as early as November 1986, cityhood advocates predict.
nothing written
