                                                                                             ACR 92
                                                                                              Page 1

Date of Hearing: July 3, 2023

                     ASSEMBLY COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION
                                  Laura Friedman, Chair
                       ACR 92 (Schiavo) – As Introduced June 5, 2023

SUBJECT: Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Deputy Hagop “Jake” Kuredjian Memorial Highway

SUMMARY: Designates the portion of Interstate 5 between the Pico-Lyons Overcrossing and
the McBean Parkway Overcrossing in the City of Santa Clarita as the Los Angeles County
Sheriff’s Deputy Hagop “Jake” Kuredjian Memorial Highway. The measure would also request
that the California Department of Transportation (Caltrans) determine the cost of appropriate
signs showing this special designation and, upon receiving donations from nonstate sources
sufficient to cover the cost, to erect those signs.

EXISTING LAW: Assigns Caltrans the responsibility of operating and maintaining state
highways. This includes the installation and maintenance of highway signs.

FISCAL EFFECT: Unknown, but the measure requests that Caltrans determine the cost of
appropriate signage consistent with requirements for the state highway system, and only erect the
appropriate signage upon receiving donations from non-state sources covering the cost.

COMMENTS: Of all the promises America offers, none is more elusive or precious than the
right to be free from crime and violence. Californians are indebted every day to our peace
officers, and we pay special tribute to their bravery and dedication and share in their pain when
one of their members is killed in the line of duty. The men and women of law enforcement have
the unenviable task of guaranteeing the public’s safety and it is as difficult and dangerous as it is
important, as evidenced by the death, at 40 years of age, of Deputy Hagop “Jake” Kuredjian of
the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department, who was tragically shot and killed on August 31,
2001, in the City of Santa Clarita.

Deputy Kuredjian faithfully served the residents of the County of Los Angeles as a deputy
sheriff and had stated that the reason he became a law enforcement officer was to be a
peacekeeper and community guardian. Deputy Kuredjian worked to serve those that needed his
service, help those who needed help, and protect those that couldn’t protect themselves. As a
deputy sheriff, he was praised by his peers, supervisors, and members of the community for his
tireless efforts to protect people, prevent incidents, and serve as a leader.

It is appropriate to recognize the hazardous work, serious responsibility, and strong commitment
that Deputy Kuredjian willingly accepted during his 17 years as a law enforcement officer.
Deputy Kuredjian is remembered as a dedicated and devoted son to Anahid, and role model for
his brothers Raffi and Garo, and a man who committed his life, beliefs, and career to the County
of Los Angeles and the safety of its residents.
                                                                ACR 92
                                                                 Page 2

REGISTERED SUPPORT / OPPOSITION:

Support

Association for Los Angeles Deputy Sheriffs
Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department
Opposition

None on file

Analysis Prepared by: Aimee Anspach / TRANS. / (916) 319-2093
