Arthur E. Pelino - California Peace Officers' Memorial Foundation
 Skip to content
 Primary Menu
The Memorial
Annual Memorial Ceremony
Monument Expansion Project
Donations
History
CPOMF Board
Galleries
Honor Roll
In the Line of Duty
Honored Officers
Tributes
In The Line of Duty Magazine
Guidelines
Survivor Assistance
Scholarship
Contact Us
Search for an Honored Officer
Sponsorship Opportunities
Donate Now
Fallen Officers Notifications
California Peace Officers' Memorial Foundation
Honoring Our Fallen Heroes
Search for an Honored Officer
Sponsorship Opportunities
Donate Now
Fallen Officers Notifications
Honor Roll
Deputy
Arthur E. Pelino
 Date of Birth
 April 15, 1926
 Appointed
 March 20, 1959
 Department
 Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department
 End of Watch
 March 19, 1978
 Plaque
 19
Deputy Arthur Pelino was assigned to the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department Gorman Station at the time of his murder. Deputy Pelino was the resident deputy at Gorman and lived there with his wife and six children. Deputy Pelino arrested a man he described as mentally disturbed and possibly violent, but told deputies at the Santa Clarita Valley Station (the nearest help) that he had the situation under control and did not need help. Deputy Pelino was shot with his own revolver during the booking process. Two of his children found him on the floor with the suspect sitting nearby. They ran and told their mother, who managed to get the man into the lock-up and then call for assistance, but Deputy Pelino was already dead.
 Tributes in honor of Deputy Arthur E. Pelino 
Supervisor for my Explorer Group
As a high school student and an Explorer Art was always giving advice and guidance. Riding patrol with Art was always going to be a great shift. His interaction with the people who had called for service and or traffic stops is still memorable. It was my job to go and pick up Art and prepare him for burial as I was an employee at Piece Brothers. It was an honor to assist Pat and the kids to get their father back for a last tribute. Art and Sgt. Warford were both mentors and I would eventually become a deputy sheriff myself.
I will never forget “Deputy” Pelino, Art!
 Posted by John J Nazarian 
 June 26, 2022 at 9:18 am
Mrs.
May you continue to Rest In Peace. You are a hero. Thank you for your service.
 Posted by Leslie Long 
 March 23, 2018 at 7:56 pm
Deputy Pelino
May you rest in everlasting peace deputy Pelino. Thank you for serving and protecting us. May your memory live on through your children and fellow deputies. I reside in the house behind the old substation. I wish there was a plaque in your honor on the property for you to be remembered
 Posted by Valerie cason 
 March 20, 2018 at 6:54 pm
« Charles Plumleigh
Thomas H. Pohlman »
Honored Officer Search 
Submit A Tribute
In Honor of
Deputy Arthur E. Pelino
Name * 
Email * 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
Title * 
Tribute Message * 
Δ
California Peace Officers' Memorial Foundation    
640 Bercut Drive, Sacramento, CA 95811
 Copyright © 2026 California Peace Officers' Memorial Foundation. All Rights Reserved.
  |  
 Website designed and maintained by