                                         March – 14

1 March 1978 – Reserve Deputy Charles Christopher Plumleigh, Automobile Accident

Reserve Deputy Charles Plumleigh and Deputy Gregory Low were killed in an automobile
accident. The two deputies were responding to a burglary in progress call when their patrol car
collided with a second patrol car.

Reserve Deputy Plumleigh died from his injuries on March 1, three days after the collision that
killed Deputy Low.

10 March 1946 – Sergeant Fred P. Guiol, Gunfire

Sergeant Guiol was shot and killed when he attempted to take action when he was robbed while
off duty. He was sitting in his vehicle when a man approached him and held him at gunpoint.
Sergeant Guiol attempted to dissuade the man from robbing him but was shot and killed.

Sergeant Guiol was assigned to the Men's Central Jail. He was survived by his three sons and
daughter.

11 March 1984 – Officer Howard Shao Wai Huang (Los Angeles County Department of
Parks and Recreation Police), Gunfire

Officer Howard Huang was shot and killed when he was ambushed by unknown assailants while
sitting in his patrol car.

He was working the graveyard shift while assigned to the South Central Region when the
suspect(s) opened fire from behind with an AK-47, firing more then 20 rounds at him. The
suspects fled and have never been apprehended.

19 March 1978 – Deputy Arthur E. Pelino, Gunfire

Deputy Arthur Pelino was shot and killed by a mentally deranged suspect. Deputy Pelino was a
Resident Deputy in Gorman, which is located in a rural section of Los Angeles County. He had
arrested a mentally deranged suspect that was known to have been violent. Deputy Pelino
cancelled Deputies that were responding to back him up stating he had the situation under
control. Deputy Pelino took the suspect back to his office to start the booking process.

During the booking process, the suspect started to struggle and was able to get Deputy Pelino's
service weapon. The suspect shot and killed Deputy Pelino and sat down in the office.

Two of Deputy Pelino's children found him and the suspect and ran to get help. Deputy Pelino's
wife was able to get the suspect into a cell and call for assistance.
Deputy Pelino had been with the agency for 21 years and was survived by his wife, three sons,
and three daughters.

19 March 1983 – Deputy Lawrence “Mike” Lavieri, Gunfire

Deputy Mike Lavieri was shot and killed when he and his partner responded to a gas station to
investigate a suspicious person.

Deputy Lavieri located the man inside a car and began to question him. During the questioning
the suspect obtained Lavieri’s gun. Lavieri’s partner held on to the revolver’s cylinder, keeping
it from firing. The suspect bit the deputy’s arm until he released the gun. The suspect opened
fire, wounding Deputy Lavieri's partner and also grazing Lavieri’s forehead. Lavieri took his
partner’s gun and ran after the suspect. With blood running in his eyes, Deputy Lavieri then
chased the suspect into a home two doors down where the two exchanged shots. Deputy Lavieri
was shot in the face and killed in the hallway of the house.

The suspect was taken into custody after a mob of angry citizens restrained him. The man was
convicted of Deputy Lavieri's murder and sentenced to life.

Deputy Lavieri had been employed with the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department for 16
years.

20 March 1967 – Reserve Deputy Michael V. Wigderson, Accidental Gunfire

Reserve Deputy Wigderson was accidentally shot and killed during a training exercise at the
Reserve Academy in East Los Angeles. The training exercise involved Reserve Deputy
Wigderson and another reserve deputy who were to arrest a suspect played by the instructor. As
the two reserves attempted to disarm the instructor, the instructor’s gun, which had accidentally
been loaded with live ammunition, discharged. The rounds struck Reserve Deputy Wigderson in
the stomach and the other deputy in the arm.

20 March 1889 – Constable Anton Harnischfeger, Gunfire

Garvanza Constable Anton Harnischfeger was shot in the head attempting to make an arrest on
Sunday March 17, 1889. He succumbed to his injuries on March 20 and was buried on March 22
in San Gabriel.

Harnischfeger was attempting to arrest B.S. Sprague in his home after the man was accused of
battering a fifteen year old girl over the head with a piece of wood. Sprague shot Harnischfeger
in the forehead with a .38. Four other men who were assisting the constable in his efforts to
make the arrest returned fire, but Sprague managed to shoot his way out of the house and flee. A
posse under the leadership of Marshal Shufman of Pasadena tracked Sprague down near
Alhambra. A furious gun battle ensued in which Sprague fired thirty rounds at the posse. He
was eventually flanked and shot to death by United States Registrar Harry Patton.
Until the year before his death Constable Harnischfeger lived in New York where he was a
barber. Ironically, he came to California in 1888 for his health. He had asthma. The board of
supervisors appointed Harnischfeger to the Garvanza Constable post after it became vacant. It
was considered a low paying and not very desirable position. Harnischfeger was well regarded
for his service as township constable. He forty years old at the time of his death and was married
with four children. He was a native of Germany.

20 March 1919 – Deputies Emma Benson & Harry Guard, Automobile Accident

Deputy Sheriff Emma Benson and Deputy Sheriff Harry Guard were killed when their
department vehicle was struck by a trolley car on Telegraph Road.

The two deputies, along with a third deputy, were returning to the jail after delivering a mental
patient to a hospital in Norwalk when their Model T was struck.

Deputy Benson was assigned to transporting female prisoners. Deputy Guard was a Department
driver.

21 March 1964 – Deputy William A. White, Vehicular Assault

Deputy White was killed when his patrol car was struck by the getaway vehicle from a
disturbance call he was en route to. Deputy White was transported to St. Francis Hospital where
he succumbed to his injuries about four hours later.

Deputy White had been with the agency for five years and was assigned to the Firestone Park
Station.

23 March 2006 – Deputy Pierre Walter Bain, Motorcycle Accident

Deputy Pierre Bain was killed in a motorcycle accident when he was attempting to pull over a
speeding motorist.

Deputy Bain was following a speeding car at approximately 1730 hours when he entered the
intersection of Avenue K and 20th Street on a green light. A car alongside him veered into his
lane. Deputy Bain swerved to avoid the car, but the car just nipped the motorcycle, causing it to
crash. The motorcycle hit a tree, and Deputy Bain was thrown off the bike and into another tree,
then into another, and suffered massive injuries. He was transported to Antelope Valley Medical
Center where he was pronounced dead.

On March 23rd, 2007, a park in Lancaster, at Avenue I and Fifth Street East, was renamed the
Pierre W. Bain park.
The driver who struck Deputy Bain was charged with vehicular manslaughter. A bench warrant
was issued for his arrest after he failed to appear at court to face the charges in April 2007. In
August 2008 he was convicted of involuntary manslaughter.

Deputy Bain had served with the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department for 14 years and was
assigned to the Lancaster station. He is survived by his wife, three daughters, and his parents.

26 March 1968 – Officer Ralph Kay Reeves (Compton PD), Heart Attack

Police Officer Ralph Reeves died as the result of a heart attack suffered while struggling with a
student at Compton High School.

Officer Reeves was dispatched to respond to the school to investigate reports of an intoxicated
student. The student began to struggle with Officer Reeves and a group of other students began
to surround the two and tried to take the subject from Officer Reeves' custody. As other officers
arrived Officer Reeves collapsed. The other officers were able to pull Officer Reeves to safety
and called an ambulance.

He was transported to a local hospital where it was learned that he had suffered a heart attack.
His condition never improved and he died as a result on March 26th, 1968.

Officer Reeves was survived by his wife, four children, and three grandchildren.

Officer Reeves' brother, Patrolman Richard Vance Reeves, was killed in the line of duty on
October 2nd, 1957, while serving with the Kansas City, Missouri, Police Department.

28 March 2006 – Deputy Maria Cecilia Rosa, Gunfire

Deputy Maria Rosa was shot and killed by two robbery suspects after they identified her as a
deputy during the incident.

Deputy Rosa was leaving a friend's home to report for duty when two juveniles approached her
on bicycles and attempted to rob her. As they took items from her they discovered her gun and
badge and immediately opened fire, fatally wounding her.

Both suspects were apprehended and charged with her murder. In 2007 the suspect who shot
Deputy Rosa was convicted of murder.

Deputy Rosa had served with the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department for 6 years. She is
survived by her sister and two brothers.


31 March 1992 – Deputy Nelson Henry Yamamoto, Gunfire

Deputy Yamamoto died two days after being shot when he and other deputies responded to a
man with a gun call. The suspect was shot and killed by New York State Police officers a few
days after the incident.

Deputy Yamamoto had served with the agency for 3 years. He was survived by his parents.
