FOREWORD

‘The Honor List of Dead and Missing for the
STATE OF CALIFORNIA

is published by the War Department for the information of public officials, the press,
the radio and interested organizations. It contains the latest and most complete data
available on all military personnel who were killed or died, or became and remained
missing, between the President’s declaration of unlimfted national emergency on
May 27, 1941, and the cut-off date of this report, January 31, 1946, and includes
oth battle and non-battle dead or missing. The complete work, of which ihis volume
isa part, contains about 300,000 names of men and women Who gave their lives
while serving in the Army of the United States,

As in any work of this scope, errors will occur. Careful checks by the
Casualty Branch of The Adjutant General’s Office and by Machine Records Units
have reduced these errors to a minimum, but publication of this preliminary report
at this time makes it inevitable that mistakes and omissions will be found herein.
Use of the most advanced type of tabulating and recording machines has reduced
the factor of human error toa minimum, but errata originally introduced into the
machine records cards will be reflected in the final lists. To cope with this possi-
bility, all Hsts have been carefully proof-read after preparation. It is planned to
publish a complete and final list of deaths at some time in the future, and errors
discovered herein will be corrected in that list.

The STATE OF CALIFORNIA contained 5.15, per cent of the
population of the United States and possessions (excluding the Philippine Islands) in
1940 and contributed 5.53 per cent of the total number who entered the Army.
Of these men and women of CALIFORNIA ‘who went to war,
3.09 per cent failed to return. This figure represents 6.5% per cent of

the Army’s total dead and missing.

‘The number of missing persons is being reduced daily through operation of
Army Search Teams in all theaters of operations.

Under the provisions of Public Law 490, 77th Congress, as amended by Public
Laws 848, 77th Congress, and 408, 76th Congress, changes of casualty status are
currently being made. This law and its amendments provide for the payment of pay
and allowances to missing persons, and for the administrative finding of death of
those persons in whose cases there is an absence of presumptive proof of continued
existence. The Secretary of War is empowered by the Congress to make such find~
ings of death, and the Secretary’s finding in such a case is equivalent to a legal
statement that such a person is in fact dead. Wills are probated, insurance becomes
payable, debts are settled and government gratulty benefits are paid on the basis of
the administrative finding of death. ‘Thus tt becomes obvious that such findings
must be made only with the greatest of care, if only because of the legal involvements;
not to mention the effects of such findings on next-of-kin.

Findings of death mnder Public Law 490 and its amendments are made in the
case of persons when--and only when--there 1s either conclusive proof that the
person 1s dead or equally overwhelming evidence that under the circumstances the
person could not have remained alive. These findings are made only after review
and after a lapse of at least one year from the time of disappearance.

Most of the persons listed herein as missing disappeared less than a year
prior to January 31, 1946, the cut-off date mentioned above. As time passes the fate
of some of these missing will become known and others will be declared dead in the

absence of hope that they are living. A few--too small a number to be considered
as a percentage ofthe missing--fall into a third category: persons who intentionally
deserted the service and are bending every effort to avoid repatriation. Cases of
this type have been discovered in the past but the number of these cases is exceed-
ingly small.

‘The physical search for missing persons, which went on all during the war,
has been expanded and extended since the collapse of enemy resistance, Experts in
all fields of investigation and identification have been sent into areas where missing
persons were last seen. Through conferences with local officials and clergymen
and by means of checks of rosters and other military lists, the bodies of missing
persons are being recovered and identified daily. Though the loss of official records,
as at Corregidor in 1942 and during the Ardennes counteroffensive of 1944-45, has
increased the difficulties encountered by the search teams, the scope of the teams’
work has been so broad in the past eight months (in the case of Japan) to one year
(in Germany) that the War Department is reluctant to hold out hope to next of kin
that any missing personnel are still alive.

No civilians are included inthis report. Red Cross personnel and other civilians
serving with the Army became casualties during the War, but procedure for reporting
civilian personnel differs from that for reporting military individuals.

‘The following pages show a breakdown by counties and types of casualties,
followed by a breakdown alphabetically by counties, the counties themselves being
listed in alphabetical order.

In the preparation of these lists, it was necessary to establish aset of criteria
‘on which the proper location of each individual’s name would be determined. The
following procedure was set up:

(1) Ifan individual gave an address as his home when he entered the Army,
his name is listed in the county in which this address was located.

(2) Ifhe gave no home address, but designated a beneficiary or next of kin--
elther‘of whom must be a relative in limited degrees of kinship--or in the absence
of relatives an emergency addressee who may be ariend, his name will appear in
the county in which the address of the beneficiary, next of kin or emergency ad-
aressee is located.

(8) Ifneither home nor emergency address. was given (this was the case in
rare instances where aliens were without family or residence in this country) the
county of the draft board of origin is the one in which he is listed.

(4) Inthe case of certain Regular Army personnel who moved their homes
from place to place according to the exigencies of the service, the only address
available is “The Adjutant General”, and these personnel will be listed inthe District
of Columbia booklet.

(5) A very few cases exist in which none of these four criteria obtains. It is
impossible to determine the county in these cases and such individuals are listed in
some state volumes under “State at Large”, a listing following the last county
listing in the book. No instances have been found wherein it is Impossible to locate
a person as to state except as mentioned in (4) above.

‘The lists which follow contain information as to individuals in the following
order: name, army serial number, grade and status of casualty. A word of expla-
nation of methods of listing and of symbols used follows:

NAME: Because of standardized usage for names in the Army, some indivi-
duals listed herein may not be shown under the name by which they were called in
