civilian life. For instance, a man listed herein as “Smith, William P.”’ may have
‘been known to his friends as “‘Paul Smith” because in civilian life he did not choose
to use the name “William”. In Army usage the first name is used in full and other
given names follow in order as initials. Names prefixed with “Mc”? are listed be-
tween names beginning “Ma’’ and those beginning ‘“‘Me”’, and similarly names be-
ginning “Mac” will be found after “Mabry” and before “Madison”. Because of a
peculiarity of the machines used in these tables, prefixed and hyphenated names do
not always appear in strict alphabetical order, and absolute correctness in the order
of alphabetizing names does not govern after the tenth letter of aname. However,
for all practical purposes the names will be in alphabetical order and cases will be
extremely rare where a name will be more than one or two lines out of place.

ARMY SERIAL NUMBER: Because of the tremendous number of individuals
who have passed through the Army, serial numbers are given to prevent confusion.
Using the name “William P. Smith’ as above as an example, it was found that at
the time of writing there were 84 menof this name in the Army, and several hundred
men with the name “William Smith”’ without respect to initials. In attempting to
identify one of this number much confusion could arise, and this is obviated by the
use of a serial number.

Serial numbers are assigned with great care and according to a set of regu-
lations. Consecutive serial numbers, for example, are not assigned to twins since
this might cause confusions of identity between two persons with the same birth
date and same general physical characteristics.

Generally speaking, numbers fall into two broad categories: simple seven
or eight digit numbers (in a few cases fewer digits) for male enlisted personnel,
and prefixed serial numbers for other personnel. Regular Army enlisted men who
entered the service before the outset of Selective Service bear seven-digit or lower
serial numbers, usually beginning with “‘6’’ or “7’’, as 6974426, Men who enlisted
in the Army of the United States have eight-digit numbers beginning with “1”, the
second digit indicating the Service Command of origin. For example, the serial
number 14066025 would indicate that the man enlisted in the Army of the United
States in the Fourth Service Command (Southeastern U. S.), Men called into federally
recognized National Guard service received eight-digit numbers beginning with “2”,
the third digit representing the Service Command: 20107656 indicates a National
Guardsman from New England (First Service Command). Men inducted or enlisted
through Selective Service were given eight-digit numbers beginning with “3”” or “4”,
the second digit representing the Service Command. The prefixed serial numbers
for other than male enlisted personnel carrya designated letter: 0- (as in 0-1574257)
for male commissioned officers; W- for mele Warrant officers; T- for Flight offi-
cers of the Army Air Forces; L-for commissioned officers of the Women’s Army
Corps; V- for WAC Warrant officers; A- for WAC enlisted women; R- for Hospital
Dietitians, and M- for Physical Therapy Aides.

GRADE: Thisis synonymous with the misnomer “‘rank”’, andthe abbreviations
which may be found in this book are as follows: GEN, General (four star); LT G,
Lieutenant General, (three star); MG, Major General (two star); BG, Brigadier
General (one star); COL, Colonel; LTC, Lieutenant Colonel; MAJ, Major; CAPT,
Captain; 1 LT, First Lieutenant; 2 UT, Second Lieutenant; C WO, Chief Warrant
Officer; WOJG, Warrant Officer, Junior Grade; FL O, Flight Officer; AV.C, Aviation
Cadet; MSG, Master Sergeant; 1SG, First Sergeant; TSG, Technical Sergeant;

SSG, Staff Sergeant; TEC3, Technician Third Grade; SGT, Sergeant, TEC4, Tech-
nician Fourth Grade; CPL, Corporal; TECS, Technician Fifth Grade; PFC, Private
First Class, and PVT, Private.

TYPE OF CASUALTY: This is indicated by the symbol at the far right of
each column. An individual who was killed in action, whether at the front or by
enemy action inthe rear areas, or if a prisoner of war, whether by air bombardment
of his prison camp or by being shot while escaping. is designated “KIA.” Persons
who were wounded and later died are marked “DOW’’--died of wounds. Those who
suffered fatal battle INJURIES as opposed to WOUNDS, in combat or in combat areas,
and died ina line-of-duty status, are designated “DOI"--died of injuries. Other
Mne-of-duty deaths, such as from sickness, homicide. suicide or accidents outside
combat areas (including training and maneuver deaths) are listed “DNB”’--died,

non-battle.. Individuals who were determined to be dead under Public Law 490 are
designated “FOD”--finding of death. Missing persons are marked with the single
letter “iM”,

‘Only those persons who died in a line-of-duty status are listed herein. Indi-
viduals who were not in line of duty at the time of their deaths are not so listed.
‘Though personnel not in line of duty are not listed, failure to find in these lists the
name of a person known to be dead should not be taken as prima-facie evidence that
such person died not in line of duty.

Because of the large number of names included in this work--the total for all
states and territories will take up about 1,700 pages--it has been deemed imprac-
ticable to include the name iind address of next ofkin orto break downthe residence
units smaller than counties. Counties were selected as the unit of breakdown for
two reasons: information media rarely circulate in areas smaller than counties,
and draft boards are located on a county-population basis. It was felt that coordi-
nation between newspapers and other media on the one hand and draft boards on the
other, a coordination which has existed through nearly six years of Selective Serv-
ice, could be achieved more easily in cases where questions as to identity arise
than could coordination between newspapers and any larger instrumentality of the
government.

It should be pointed out that this work is published solely as a public service
and in response to demands from interested persons. The possibility that these
lists might fall into the hands of unscrupulous persons is inevitable, and it is pointed
out that misuse of these lists for gain could redound only to the sorrow of the
bereaved. While is it neither the policy nor the desire of the War Department to
discuss the ways in which these lists will be used once they are released for publi-
cation, it is the sincere hope of the War Department that persons responsible for
their dissemination will be governed by good taste and consideration for the feelings
of next of kin,

Patriotic organizations will find these lists of value in establishing or check-
ing honor rolls in their communities. In this connection, it should be emphasized
again that these lists are preliminary andwill one day be superseded by a list which
canbe considered final. Changes instatus may occur between the time of publication
of these lists and preparation of new ones, and actuarial tables indicate that new
names will be added. In some rare cases names of persons already dead may have
been eliminated inadvertently from these lists.
