                 l
                                                    26521 Summit Circle, Santa Clarita, CA 91350-
                                                                                             3049
                                                               (661) 297-1600 | yourSCVwater.com


NEWS RELEASE
DATE: JULY 18, 2022
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE


              SCV Water announces passing of Jerry Gladbach
           Current Board Vice President, Gladbach served for 37 years

SANTA CLARITA – SCV Water is sad to report the passing of Board Vice President Jerry
Gladbach on Wednesday. Jerry was a pillar in the water industry, locally, state-wide and nationally,
with a career stretching back more than 60 years.
“We lost a dear friend and vital member of our board,” said Board President Gary Martin. “Jerry
was one of the most knowledgeable and accomplished water professionals in the state and we
were fortunate to have him serving the SCV community for the last 37 years.”
Jerry was first elected to the Castaic Lake Water Agency Board in 1985 and has served
continuously ever since, including when CLWA merged with other local water entities to become
SCV Water in January 2018. He was the current vice president and served as president from 1987-
1991. One of the many projects he championed was the construction of the Rio Vista Water
Treatment Plant, which broke ground in 1991. The plant more than doubled the agency’s capacity
for treating imported water. He also played a key role in increasing imported water supply by 13%
through the acquisition of the Devil’s Den Water District in Kern County in 1991.
“Jerry was a colleague and a mentor, and to say that his will be big shoes to fill is an
understatement of reality that we will struggle with going forward. It has been my distinct honor and
privilege to know and to work with Jerry during my time on the board,” said Martin.
SCV Water General Manager Matt Stone said, “Jerry was a big supporter of our mission to provide
reliable, high-quality water for our community. He often took time to recognize members of our staff
for their individual and group accomplishments, and he always had words of advice or
encouragement for me.”
In addition to serving on the Board of Directors for SCV Water, Jerry was a leader in state and
national water organizations.
As a member of the Board of Directors of the National Water Resources Association, he helped
promote the development and use of the water resources of the nation. He was also active in the
Association of California Water Agencies (ACWA), serving as president from 2002 – 2004, and
taking roles on many of its committees. He was the current President of the Board of Directors of
the ACWA Joint Powers Insurance Authority which provides liability, property, workers’
compensation and health insurance to members of ACWA.
Jerry was also current Chair of the Local Agency Formation Commission for Los Angeles County,
serving on the commission since 2001. He is Past President of the California Association of Local
Agency Formation Commissions and was presented with its “Most Outstanding Commissioner”
award in 2013. In announcing the award, then LA County Supervisor Michael D. Antonovich said,
“Chairman Gladbach’s many years of dedicated leadership, sound judgment and trusted guidance
on vital local boundary and land use issues have earned him this distinguished award.”
Jerry is survived by his wife, Donna, three children and six grandchildren. He was an engineer who
retired after 35 years of service to the Los Angeles Department of Water & Power. Jerry lived in the
Santa Clarita Valley since 1968. He received his Master of Science and Bachelor of Science
degrees from the University of Missouri – Columbia. He is a registered professional engineer in
California and is a “Fellow” Life Member of the American Society of Civil Engineers. He retired as
Manager of Marketing and Special Projects from the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power
after 35 years.
“Jerry is the embodiment of a public servant. Personally, he has always been very kind to me. I
would not be where I am today without his encouragement and support,” said Steve Cole, assistant
general manager for SCV Water.
Stone added, “One of the hallmarks of Jerry’s life of service was his deep and durable involvement
in the many organizations he participated in. It was truly a life-long commitment over many decades
of service. He approached all of his activities with seemingly limitless energy and enthusiasm. I will
miss him.”


                                                 ###

For more information, please contact:

Kathie Martin
Communications Manager
SCV Water
kmartin@scvwa.org
661-513-1265




                                                                                                    2
