Local Agency Formation Commission of Napa County
Subdivision of the State of California

1754 Second Street, Suite C
Napa, California 94559
Phone: (707) 259-8645
www.napa.lafco.ca.gov

We Manage Local Government Boundaries, Evaluate Municipal Services, and Protect Agriculture

Agenda Item 5e (Consent/Information)

TO:

Local Agency Formation Commission

PREPARED BY:

Brendon Freeman, Executive Officer
Dawn Mittleman Longoria, Analyst II/Interim Clerk

MEETING DATE: October 3, 2022
SUBJECT:

CALAFCO Quarterly Newsletter

SUMMARY
This is a consent item for information purposes only. Accordingly, if interested, the
Commission is invited to pull this item for additional discussion with the concurrence of
the Chair. No formal action will be taken as part of this item.
CALAFCO recently released a Quarterly Newsletter dated August 2022, included as
Attachment One, with a summary of matters that may be of interest to members of the
Commission.

ATTACHMENT
1) CALAFCO Quarterly Newsletter (August 2022)

Margie Mohler, Chair
Councilmember, Town of Yountville

Brad Wagenknecht, Vice Chair
County of Napa Supervisor, 1st District

Kenneth Leary, Commissioner
Representative of the General Public

Mariam Aboudamous, Commissioner
Councilmember, City of American Canyon

Diane Dillon, Commissioner
County of Napa Supervisor, 3rd District

Eve Kahn, Alternate Commissioner
Representative of the General Public

Beth Painter, Alternate Commissioner
Councilmember, City of Napa

Ryan Gregory, Alternate Commissioner
County of Napa Supervisor, 2nd District

Brendon Freeman
Executive Officer

Attachment One

NEWSLETTER
BOARDROOM Brief

August, 2022 Edition

SBA 938 Chaptered

AT ITS VIRTUAL meeting on July 22, the
Board received the year-end financial reports
from our accountant, considered a revised FY
22-23 budget, and resumed their discussion
of the Government Code Section 56133
legislative amendment proposal.
The Fourth Quarter financial report found
that the association is sound financially. It
also disclosed an FY 21-22 net balance
that was slightly larger than had been
expected in April. Consequently, a revised FY
22-23 budget was also presented to the
Board to capture the higher carryover, as
well as to remove an erroneously duplicated
stipend calculation from the Executive
Director’s salary line for the upcoming year.
Those adjustments, along with another that
the Board made to the payroll tax line,
resulted in a revised FY 22-23 budget. The
differences from the original version
approved in April were increased carryover
and contingency lines, and reductions to the
ED salary and payroll tax lines. The revised
budget can be found on the Board meeting
portion of the website.
The last action item considered was the
reconsideration of the legislative proposal
from San Diego LAFCo regarding Government
Code §56133. As many will recall, the topic
has been a continuing one having been
discussed and tabled at the January and April
Board meetings. In April, the Board sent the
proposal back to the Legislative Committee
to complete additional research. Ultimately,
the Board approved adding the endeavor to
the list of CALAFCO projects, as well as
approving a White Paper to guide the effort.
Reports were also received regarding
CALAFCO U and the fall conference including Elections. It was noted that
Achievement Awards have an upcoming
deadline of AUGUST 12TH - so get those
nomination packets in ASAP!
The next Board meeting is scheduled for
October 21st during the conference.
All agendas, staff reports, and minutes can be
found on the CALAFCO website at
www.calafco.org. Any questions should be directed
to the Executive Director at rlaroche@calafco.org.

August, 2022

Screen shot of Senator Hertzberg presenting SB 938 on the
Senate Floor on June 23, 2022

AS MOST of you already know, SB 938 (the
Protest Provisions bill) has been successfully
concluded. It passed the Senate Floor on June 23rd
with a 38-0 vote, and was signed by the Governor
on July 1st.
Thank you to the many LAFCOs who rushed to get
letters submitted to the Governor after that June
23rd passage.
Given that this is the culmination of an effort that
began in 2017, special thanks must again go to the
Protest Provisions Working Group members for the
YEARS of work on this bill.
The Board of Directors - and all of CALAFCO extends its sincerest thanks and gratitude to Jo
MacKenzie, José Henriquez, Kai Luoma, Steve
Lucas, Paul Novak, Holly Whatley and, of
course, Pamela Miller (who stayed on to work the
bill in a volunteer capacity.)

Other Legislative Updates
AB 2957, the CALAFCO sponsored Omnibus bill has
also been successfully completed. It was passed
by the Senate on June 9th, and signed by the
Governor on June 21, 2022. Thank you to all of
the Legislative Committee members and EOs who
submitted proposed changes for the bill. Special
thanks to Joe Serrano who had the unenviable
task of logging all of those changes!

| Page 1 of 4
Copyright © 2022 CALAFCO. All Rights Reserved.

See OTHER UPDATES on Page 3

CALAFCO Quarterly Newsletter

A Message from the

Executive
Director

August, 2022

IN MEMORIUM
JERRY GLADBACH, Los Angeles LAFCo Commissioner

It’s been a busy few
months in the office.
We’ve held two successful and wellreceived CALAFCO U webinars. Like
much of what we do, these could not
exist without the volunteerism of our
panelists. Thanks to Carolyn Emery
(OC), Alison Alpert (BB&K), and Gary
Phillips (Bob Murray and Associates) for
participating in our June webinar on
recruitments and hiring in a post
pandemic world. Also, kudos to David
Ruderman (Colantuono, Highsmith &
Whatley) for organizing our July offering
regarding R&T 99, with thanks to
panelists José Henriquez (Sacramento),
Israel Guevara (OC Auditor-Controller)
and Holly Whatley (CHW). I hear time
and again how much our members
appreciate these offerings!
Our next CALAFCO U is scheduled in
September, then they will go on hiatus
through the conference and holidays.
The target month for our first session in
2023 is February. Thanks to Dawn
Mittleman Longoria (Napa) who has been
my wing person on these. I could NOT
have made it without her!!
Jeni and I are now in full conference
mode. Registration opened on July 5th
and they have been coming in steadily.
If you missed the July 31st Early Bird
deadline, the next date to watch is
August 31st which will be the last day
to get the Standard Registration Fee.
After that it will be Late Fee only.
Sponsorship packets were sent out and
we’re seeing some new and returning
sponsors already! However, I would ask
and encourage you all to send a packet
to those in your networks as well.
Our conference planning committee is
working hard and the program is taking
shape. Many thanks to José Henriquez
who is spearheading that effort. Look for
more specifics to be announced soon.
Also, a reminder that ACHIEVEMENT
AWARD NOMINATIONS are due no
later than August 12th at 5:00 PM so
See ED, column right

August, 2022

Attachment One

Sad news from Los Angeles LAFCo who lost
long-time commissioner, Jerry Gladbach, on
July 14th. Commissioner Gladbach was a
representative of the Santa Clarita Valley
Water Agency and had held a seat on the L.A.
LAFCo where he had served as its Chair for 16
years. Commissioner Gladbach also served as
a CALAFCO Director from 2005 to 2013, held
the position of CALAFCO Board Chair in 2012,
received the Most Outstanding Commissioner
Award in 2013, as well as the prestigious and well-deserved Lifetime
Achievement Award in 2021.
A resident of the Santa Clarita Valley since 1968, Commissioner
Gladbach was a do-er who had also served on boards of the National
Water Resources Association and the California Water Agencies Joint
Powers Insurance Authority. He was renowned for his knowledge,
dedication, kindness, and friendliness and will be missed by all.
CALAFCO sends its deepest condolences to Commissioner Gladbach’s
family, friends, and co-workers.

Contra Costa LAFCo bid farewell to Commissioner Igor
Skaredoff (Contra Costa Resource Conservation District) who served
as a Special District member since 2014. During Commissioner
Skaredoff’s tenure, Contra Costa LAFCo competed numerous Municipal
Service Reviews covering fire/emergency medical, reclamation,
healthcare, parks & recreation, cemetery, and city services; and acted
on over 75 proposals including dozens of boundary changes and
reorganizations, and four district dissolutions. Also, during
Commissioner Skaredoff’s tenure, Contra Costa LAFCO Commissioners
were named “Most Effective Commission” at the 2019 annual CALAFCO
conference.
See CONNECTIONS on Page 4

ED, Continued from left column
get those nominations in to Steve Lucas today!
Another date to note is September 19th at 5:00 PM - which is when
Director Nominations, Requests for Absentee/Electronic Ballots, and
names of voting delegates must be received.
And if that wasn’t enough, Absentee Ballots are due October 14th.
Lastly, a special shout out to Gary Thompson (Riverside) who will be
presenting at the CSDA conference in balmy Palm Desert on August
24th. Many thanks, Gary!
Okay, folks, I know that’s a lot of dates but you’ll also find them all on
the Calendar of Events on Page 3.
As usual, please feel free to reach out to me any time that you have
any questions or concerns. Enjoy the summer, be safe, and see you at
the Conference!!

| Page 2 of 4
Copyright © 2022 CALAFCO. All Rights Reserved.

Attachment One

CALAFCO Quarterly Newsletter

August, 2022

OTHER UPDATES

Continued from Page 1

CALAFCO is currently tracking a total of 29 bills.
Included among those are:

CALAFCO 2022 ANNUAL CONFERENCE
October 19 - 21, 2022
Join us at the Hyatt Regency Newport Beach John Wayne Airport on
October 19-21, 2022 for our long
-awaited, long-overdue Annual
Conference! The program planning committee is finalizing what
is sure to be a great program. Go
to calafco.org for more details. See you in Newport Beach!

2023 STAFF WORKSHOP
April 26 - 28, 2023
Learn technical topics in a beautiful setting! Don’t miss next year’s
Staff Workshop on the beautiful grounds of Ironstone Vineyards in
Murphys, California.

CALAFCO U explores topics of interest to LAFCos and are offered at
no cost to our members.

Sep. 19, 2022: Two Agencies in Dispute: LAFCo’s Role
1:00 PM
in Assisting in Resolving the Conflict
TBD, 2023:

The Dirty Dozen: Things I Wish I Knew About
The Act

BOARD MEETINGS:
Oct. 21, 2022
Dec. 2, 2022

LOCATION: Newport Beach (Conference)
LOCATION: Virtual

LEGISLATIVE COMMITTEE MEETINGS:
Sept. 16, 2022 CANCELLED
Oct. 7, 2022
LOCATION: Virtual
Nov. 4, 2022
LOCATION: TBD

OTHER IMPORTANT DATES:
Aug. 12, 2022 ACHIEVEMENT AWARD NOMINATIONS DUE
Sept. 19, 2022 BOARD OF DIRECTOR NOMINATIONS DUE
Sept. 19, 2022 ABSENTEE/ELECTRONIC BALLOT REQUESTS
DUE
Sept. 19, 2022 NAME OF VOTING DELEGATE DUE
Oct. 14, 2022 ABSENTEE BALLOTS ARE DUE
Oct. 20, 2022 ELECTIONS
August, 2022

AB 897 (Mullin), establishment of a regional
climate network. This bill has stalled and is in
its second year.
AB 1640 (Ward), would authorize the creation of
regional climate networks, as well as set up
guidelines. Referred to the Senate
Appropriations suspense file.
AB 1773 (Patterson), return of Williamson Act
subvention funding. Held under submission in
Assembly Appropriations on May 19th.
SB 739 (Cortese), was a gut and amend seeking
to create ministerial processes for the
annexations of unused golf courses to be used
for the development of high rise buildings with
600-700 residences. The author’s office notes
that it will not be pursuing this bill this year.
SB 852 (Dodd), is similar to AB 1640 in that it
addresses the formation of climate resilience
districts, however, this bill focuses on
enhanced infrastructure financing to fund
public capital facilities including projects that
address climate change impacts. Scheduled for
third reading in the Assembly on August 8th.
SB 1100 (Cortese), which would amend the
Brown Act to include provisions and procedures
regarding meeting disruptions has passed both
houses and is now in Engrossing and Enrolling.
SB 1490, 1491, and 1492, the annual
Validation Acts, have now been chaptered.
The legislative season is now nearing a close with
August 12th being the last day for fiscal
committees to meet and report bills. After that, the
remainder of the month will be Floor sessions only,
with August 25th being the last day to amend bills
on the floor. August 31st is the deadline for each
house to pass bills, and the Final Recess will begin
upon adjournment on that date.
It is fitting to note at this time that this important
work does not happen in a vaccum. The Legislative
Committee is composed of 32 members who have
committed to give generously of their time and
expertise. CALAFCO could not do what it does
without them, so our sincerest thanks to the
following:
Board Appointees - Bill Connelly, Gay Jones,
Mike Kelley, Chris Lopez, Jo MacKenzie, Daron
McDaniel, Mike McGill, Margie Mohler, Anita Paque,
and Josh Susman.
Staff Voting Members - Clark Alsop, Gary Bell,
Mark Bramfitt, Scott Browne, Carolyn Emery, René
LaRoche, Steve Lucas, Kai Luoma, Jennifer
Stephenson, and Gary Thompson.
Staff Alternates - Rob Fitzroy, Paula Graf, Joe
Serrano, and Paula de Sousa.
Advisory - Tara Bravo, Crystal Craig, Brandon
Fender, Sara Lytle-Pinhey, Priscilla Mumpower,
Erica Sanchez, Jim Simon, and Luis Tapia.

| Page 3 of 4
Copyright © 2022 CALAFCO. All Rights Reserved.

Attachment One

CALAFCO Quarterly Newsletter

August, 2022

Continued from Page 2

CONNECTIONS
Contra Costa also welcomed Commissioner
Patricia Bristow in June as its new Special District
member. Commissioner Bristow currently serves
as Board Member on both the Byron-BrentwoodKnightsen Union Cemetery District and the Byron
Sanitary District and serves on the Contra Costa
County Transportation Authority Citizen Advisory.
Commissioner Bristow has lived in Brentwood
and Byron her entire life and was a teacher and
counselor in the Brentwood Unified School
District for 34 years. Her family has farmed in
the community for over 100 years.

NEW Roles
LUIS TAPIA promotes to OC AEO
Orange County LAFCo announced the promotion
of Luis Tapia to the Assistant Executive Officer
position. Luis brings a great deal of experience to
the role having been with Orange LAFCO since
2016 and is an Advisory member to the CALAFCO
Legislative Committee.
NATASHA CARBAJAL hired as Santa
Barbara’s new Analyst-Clerk
Santa Barbara LAFCO is pleased to welcome
Natasha Carbajal as its new Analyst/Clerk.
Natasha had been providing clerking services for

about 10 months while she was with the Santa
Barbara Clerk of the Board’s Office. She comes to
LAFCo with a broad range of skills and abilities,
including great local government experience and
all around good public service skills. Natasha has
a Master of Public Administration from California
State University Northridge and a Bachelor of
Arts, Sociology from University Channel Islands.

MORGAN BING welcomed as SLO Clerk
Analyst
Morgan Bing has joined San Luis Obispo LAFCO
as their new Clerk Analyst. She comes to SLO
LAFCO with a Bachelors and Masters degree from
Cal Poly San Luis Obispo and four years of
experience. SLO LAFCO is very excited to have
her on their team!
SAFARINA MALUKI becomes Clerk in
Monterey
Monterey LAFCo has welcomed Safarina Maluki
as their new Clerk to the Commission/Office
Administrator. Safarina has a wide range of
responsibilities in support of the Commission and
staff, and she looks forward to getting to know
her colleagues around the State!

Congratulations one and all!

The information below is provided by the Associate member upon joining the Association. All Associate Member
information can be found in the CALAFCO Member Directory

E MULBERG & ASSOCIATES
Services include Municipal Service
Reviews, Sphere of Influence
updates, changes in organization,
staff support, CEQA analysis, and
assistance with applications to
LAFCo.
To learn more about E Mulberg &
Associates, visit their website at
www.emulberg.com, or contact Elliot
Mulberg at Elliot@emulberg.com.

LOS ANGELES COUNTY SANITATION
DISTRICTS
Provides sewer service to 78 cities and unincorporated
areas of LA County. Before a district can provide
sewage service to a territory, it must be within its
jurisdictional boundaries. Donna Curry administers the
annexation program, including processing applications
for annexation.
To learn more about LACSD visit their website at
www.lacsd.org, or contact Donna Curry at
dcurry@lacsd.org

CALAFCO wishes to thank all of our Associate Members for your ongoing support and partnership. We
look forward to highlighting you all in future Newsletters.
August, 2022

| Page 4 of 4
Copyright © 2022 CALAFCO. All Rights Reserved.

