 Jerry Gladbach | For Castaic Lake Water Agency Jerry Gladbach Navigation About Endorsements Letter to SCV Residents Qualifications Donate About Endorsements Letter to SCV Residents Qualifications Donate VOTE FOR JERRY NOVEMBER 8TH – BOARD OF DIRECTORS – CLWA DIVISION 2 Learn More Jerry Gladbach Is THE CLEAR CHOICE FOR CLWA WATER BOARD Knowledge – Dedication – Integrity – Commitment Known for his leadership in water issues locally, statewide and nationally, Jerry is the clear choice for the Castaic Lake Water Agency Board of Directors. He believes the role of the board is to ensure an ample supply of reliable, quality water at the lowest possible cost for the Santa Clarita Valley residents. As a leader, over the years, he has held critical positions which gave him the opportunity to bring a significant body of knowledge about water to share with the Castaic Lake Water Agency and the community in the Santa Clarita Valley. Originally from Missouri where he earned a Master’s degree in Civil Engineering, Jerry came to California on an internship and was later hired permanently and began a career spanning 35 years at the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power. As a registered Engineer and manager, his work and professional endeavors provided a foundation of experience he could use in the future to evaluate water issues. Over the years, representing a variety of organizations, he has worked closely with other water and power agencies as well as legislators and consultants in Sacramento and Washington DC formulating the water policies that would benefit all water users. He served on numerous committees dedicated to protecting the environment, including the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s Groundwater Task Force encouraging clean water supplies and developing fiscal policies that would provide infrastructure and efficient planning for the future. As part of his professional development, he was also very active in a variety of industry associations including the Association of California Water Agencies. As a local leader, he was the Chairman of Region 8 serving Los Angeles and Ventura Counties. Always interested in community service, Jerry was elected to the Board of Directors of the Castaic Lake Water Agency where he formerly served as the President of the Board of Directors for four years. He has been re-elected to the CLWA Board of Directors where he continues to serve as a board member. At the same time, he continued to move up the ranks at the statewide association, ACWA and became their Vice President and President in 2002-2006. He continued after that to work actively as Chairman of its Energy Committee, and a member of its groundwater and federal affairs committees. He is a member of the Past President’s Council and continues to be an integral part of the leadership at ACWA. At the same time, he has served as the Chairman of the Water Resources Committee for the CLWA. His experience also includes Alternate, Commissioner, and Chairman of the Los Angles County LAFCO; he also has served as the President of the Association of California LAFCO’s. In 2010 he was elected as the President of the ACWA/JPIA which is the Joint Powers Insurance Authority that represents nearly 400 Public Water agencies in California providing low-cost insurance to enhance safety and reduce costs for water agencies throughout the state of California. A favorite part of the job is visiting the agencies and delivering refund checks for thousands of dollars to agencies that have been able to save premiums because of their excellent stewardship. He has been re-elected to this position and continues to serve as their President at this time. Currently, Jerry is also one of three members appointed by ACWA to serve on the Board of Directors of the National Water Resources Association. Working with colleagues across state lines with an active office in Washington DC, Jerry is able to consistently share information with the community and provide up to date information and ideas gathered from a broad scope of resources. Residing in Santa Clarita Jerry is married to his lovely wife Donna; they have three children and six terrific grandchildren. Endorsements “Over the 22-years that I have been involved in water policies and management at the local, state and federal levels, I have respected Jerry Gladbach as a proven leader in California water. His past service as President of the Association of California Water Agencies (ACWA) and as a Director of the National Water Resources Association (NWRA) gives Jerry a thorough and unique understanding of the many complex water issues in California and across the West. This experience allows Jerry to bring his “big-picture” vision and broad water policy expertise to the Castaic Lake Water Agency.” ~Hon. Mark Limbaugh, former Assistant Secretary Water and Science, U.S. Department of the Interior “I have known and worked with Jerry Gladbach for the better part of 15 years at the State and National level. His knowledge of water resource issues, as well as his leadership at the state and national levels, is second to none. On a state level, he has been active with the Association of California Water Agencies (ACWA). ACWA represents over 400 water agencies in the state and is the premier advocate for water with the state legislature and California state agencies. Jerry has served in a number of leadership positions with ACWA, including President. On a national level, Jerry has been active in the National Water Resources Association (NWRA). NWRA is a nonprofit advocacy association representing thousands of water entities with Congress and Federal agencies in Washington DC. Jerry has been serving on the NWRA Board for the last 8 years. He is also a member of the Federal Affairs Committee, which establishes the positions that NWRA takes on the multitude of water issues being considered by Congress and Federal agencies. Jerry is respected by all for his humble leadership and his sage understanding of the complexities of water resources management. His career experience at the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power brings a unique perspective to water and power issues..” ~ Bob Johnson Executive Vice President of NWRA and former Commissioner of the Bureau of Reclamation “Jerry Gladbach is a recognized leader in the western water community and one of the nicest individuals you will ever meet. He is also an out-of-the-box problem solver, an innovator, and what I would call a connector of people. He understands the importance of bringing people together and has an uncanny ability to connect people in the right way to find solutions. Since the early 1990s, I have had the opportunity to observe and interact with Jerry in a variety of water issue–related meetings. He always has sound counsel and good ideas, and people highly respect him. Like the old EF Hutton commercials, when Jerry speaks, people listen. We have written about Castaic, and a number of the innovations thought of and promoted by Jerry in our Municipal Water Leader magazine and have sought his suggestions for other municipal and water-related articles. Jerry is one of the top people in California water and the very best example of a leader.” ~Kris Polly, President, Water Strategies “What we really need in the Santa Clarita Valley is 15 more Jerry Gladbach… he believes in community service and does so much for the SCV.” ~Bob Kellar, Mayor, City of Santa Clarita “In my twenty + years in the water industry, I have observed Jerry as a Board Member and as President of the Board of Directors. Jerry is well respected as a water industry leader. His ability to comprehend complex issues and break them down to understandable parts makes him an outstanding leader at the JPIA. His level of engagement and his constant push for fairness makes him one of the most qualified Board Presidents I have ever worked with. Jerry is always fighting for what is right.” ~Andy Sells, Executive Officer Association of California Water Agencies / Joint Powers Insurance Authority (ACWA JPIA) Connector. Steve Knight U.S. Congressman Connector. Scott Wilk Calif. Assemblyman Connector. Michael Antonovich Supervisor 5th District Connector. Bob Kellar Mayor, City of Santa Clarita Connector. Dante Acosta Mayor Pro-Tem, City of Santa Clarita Connector. Laurene Weste City Councilwoman, City of Santa Clarita Connector. Marsha McLean City Councilwoman, City of Santa Clarita Connector. Bruce Fortine Board of Trustees, College of the Canyons Connector. Steve Zimmer Board of Trustees, College of the Canyons Connector. Cameron Smyth Former Calif. Assemblyman Connector. Kathy Colley Board of Directors, Newhall County Water District Connector. Dan Mortensen Board of Directors, Newhall County Water District Connector. Tom Campbell President of the Board of Directors, Castaic Lake Water Agency Connector. Bill Cooper Vice President of the Board of Directors, Castaic Lake Water Agency Connector. B.J. Atkins Board of Directors, Castaic Lake Water Agency Connector. Ed Colley Board of Directors, Castaic Lake Water Agency Connector. Bob DiPrimio Board of Directors, Castaic Lake Water Agency Connector. Dean Efstathiou Board of Directors, Castaic Lake Water Agency Connector. R.J. Kelly Board of Directors, Castaic Lake Water Agency Connector. Gary Martin Board of Directors, Castaic Lake Water Agency Connector. Jacque McMillan Board of Directors, Castaic Lake Water Agency Connector. Bill Pesci Board of Directors, Castaic Lake Water Agency — A letter to SCV residents It has been an honor to represent you on the Board of Directors of the Castaic Lake Water Agency, a position that I take very seriously. I too am a resident of the Santa Clarita Valley, in fact a long term resident having lived here for over 40 years, and I have the same concerns about enough water that is high quality at a reasonable cost. The reason that I ran for the Board initially was because I was concerned that there was not enough water to meet the needs of our valley.. I also knew that any additional water that the Agency would import would be a better quality water than the groundwater that comprised most of the water used in the Santa Clarita Valley at that time. Some of my major accomplishments while I have been on the Board are: · Persuaded the Board to obtain additional water from a variety of sources · Convinced the Board to develop a long term financial plan, whereby any developer requiring additional water must pay for the incremental cost of the facilities required to provide that water including the cost of the water, treating and delivering it · Convinced the Board to develop a long term plan for all of the facilities that would be essential to meet future needs in the Valley · Persuaded the Board to participate in the rulemaking process by the United State’s Environmental Protection Agency, regarding the water quality standards for drinking water. · Persuaded the board to develop a large conservation and education garden · Urged the Board to develop a water education program designed specifically for the SCV, that was awarded a United States Department of Education grant. · Initiated efforts to increase the presence of the Agency in Sacramento and DC · Urged the Board to develop a public relations program I also supported the Board’s efforts in: · Developing a groundwater banking program · Initiating cleanup of contaminated groundwater and making polluters pay for it · Arranging the land use for the City of Santa Clarita to build Central Park Now I am asking for your support and vote in re-electing me to another term on the Castaic Lake Water Agency’s Board of Directors, so that we may continue providing you a reliable supply of high quality water at a reasonable price. Looking forward to your support and vote, I remain very grateful. Jerry Gladbach Your Director from Division 2 on the Board of Directors of the Castaic Lake Water Agency P.S. Visit our conservation garden, check out our website: we represent you and want you to be involved in the water issues of the SCV. This is what real transparency is all about! Jerry with his wife Donna and their "watchdog" Lucee anemptytextlline Viewing the California Aqueduct Jerry believes it is important to understand the water system anemptytextlline dsc_0104 anemptytextlline Visiting the kids in New Jersey anemptytextlline An Engineer by profession, Jerry reviews plans at a water facility anemptytextlline Jerry with his wife Donna attend the annual ACWA conference anemptytextlline Jerry understands both urban and rural water needs anemptytextlline img_3715 anemptytextlline Jerry with children and grandchildren anemptytextlline Jerry with Supervisor Michael Antlnovich anemptytextlline President Jerry Gladbach makes a presentation for the Association of California Water Agencies / JPIA anemptytextlline img_4914 anemptytextlline Qualifications member, board of directors, castaic lake water agency president, board of directors, assn.of california water agencies/joint powers insurance authority member, board of directors, national water resources assn. Past President, board of directors, assn. of california water agencies –Appointed the task force to produce, “ A Blueprint for Water” for California Board of directors, water education foundation, past member us environmental protection agency groundwater task force, past member US commission on water quality, past advisor advisory board, cal poly’s environmental engineering dept., past member 35 years at los angeles department of water and power, — management, engineering and environmental planning education / certification master of science, civil engineering / water resources /University of Missouri Bachelor of Science ,Civil Engineering / University of Missouri professional engineer registered in california fellow, american society of civil engineers, life member Donate Name * First Last Address * Street Address City Please Select State* Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware District of Columbia Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Armed Forces Americas Armed Forces Europe Armed Forces Pacific State ZIP Code Phone * Email * Occupation * Employer * Price * Credit Card American Express Discover MasterCard Visa Card Number Expiration Month* 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 Expiration Year* 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033 2034 2035 2036 2037 Expiration Date Security Code Cardholder Name This iframe contains the logic required to handle Ajax powered Gravity Forms. Paid for by Gladbach for Water Board 2016 ID# 1225251 Terms of Service & Privacy Policy 