E2388

Together, they give Time to Read participants
hope and an opportunity for a better future.
Time and again, this program has demonstrated its ability to take on this important
challenge of raising America’s literacy rates.
With quiet determination and steadfast commitment, Time to Read volunteers make a difference in the lives of thousands of kids and
adults each year.
For this reason, Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues to join with me in honoring the purpose and spirit of the Time to Read Literacy
Program, its volunteers and participants.

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

HON. HOWARD P. ‘‘BUCK’’ McKEON

OF MICHIGAN

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, November 17, 2005

Thursday, November 17, 2005
Mr. CONYERS. Mr. Speaker, today I rise to
speak on behalf of the earthquake which occurred in Kashmir. On October 8th, a magnitude 7.6 earthquake hit Pakistan, India, Afghanistan. So far, Over 80,000 have perished
and three million are homeless. Over half of
those who lost their lives were school aged
children who were attending school. It is evident a generation of Pakistani’s no longer
exist. I am concerned that tens of thousands
will also soon perish from weather, disease,
and malnutrition.
Our President, who campaigned as a compassionate conservative, has been wholly inadequate in his response to the crisis in Pakistan. The United Nations has asked for $550
million in emergency aid. Although, we have
given only $40 million while our generous citizens have given more than $50 million in relief
aid. To date, we have only pledged $150 million for reconstruction when the World Bank
estimates Pakistan needs $5.2 Billion. Our
government can do much better.
Last week, the President instructed 5 Fortune 500 CEOs to fundraise for the disaster.
This should help. However, we need to show
our allies that the U.S. will help them in their
time of need. If we are serious about the welfare of the Muslim world and our ally, Pakistan; then we will pledge significantly in the
upcoming donor conference this weekend in
Islamabad, Pakistan. We proved our great
generosity after Tsunami; we need to show it
again.

Ms. SLAUGHTER. Mr. Speaker, due to an
error, my vote for rollcall No. 580, on H.R.
2419, on agreeing to the conference report
was not recorded. I voted ‘‘yes’’ on this rollcall.

RECOGNIZING
THE
CITY
OF
LAPORTE, INDIANA, AS BEING
NAMED THE INDIANA CHAMBER
OF COMMERCE 2005 COMMUNITY
OF THE YEAR

OF CALIFORNIA

HON. CHRIS CHOCOLA

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

OF INDIANA

Thursday, November 17, 2005
Mr. MCKEON. Mr. Speaker, the end of 2005
will mark the conclusion of E.G. ‘‘Jerry’’
Gladbach’s term as President of the Association of California Water Agencies (ACWA). His
tenure has been marked by several successes
on behalf of ACWA and the California water
community.
A resident of Valencia together with his wife
Donna, Jerry has served as president of
ACWA since January of 2004, after having
served as ACWA Vice-President since January of 2002. He has served as a director of
Castaic Lake Water Agency in Santa Clarita
since 1985, and has served as President of
Castaic Lake’s Board of Directors and is currently the Chair of the Water Resources Committee of that Agency.
Mr. Gladbach has been involved in water
and energy issues for the past forty-two years
and active with ACWA since 1973. As President of ACWA, Jerry has led the association
in fighting to maintain water quality, protect
communities from disastrous floods, and ensure that California has the water needed for
people, agriculture and the environment.
He appointed the task force that created No
Time to Waste: A Blueprint for California
Water, a policy document that serves as a
common vision for the many diverse interests
of California’s water community, and has
drawn headlines statewide.
Mr. Gladbach served as a manager with the
Los Angeles Department of Water and Power
and retired after 35 years of service. At
LADWP he provided critical leadership on developing alternative energy supplies, environmental and governmental affairs, and design
of hydroelectric power plants and transmission
lines.
Jerry is first vice-chair of the Los Angeles
Local
Agency
Formation
Commission
(LAFCO) and is on the Executive Board of the
California Association of LAFCOs. He was recently granted lifetime membership with the
American Society of Professional Engineers.
He earned an undergraduate degree from
the University of Missouri at Colombia in 1961,
and returned in 1963, earning his Master’s degree at the same institution in 1964.
Our thanks to Jerry for a lifetime of continuing service to California.

06:46 Nov 18, 2005

Jkt 049060

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, November 17, 2005
Mr. CHOCOLA. Mr. Speaker, it should come
as no surprise to anyone who has recently visited LaPorte, Indiana that the Indiana Chamber of Commerce named the city its ‘‘2005
Community of the Year.’’ .
The honor was bestowed on LaPorte at the
Chamber’s 16th Annual Awards Dinner, held
in Indianapolis, Indiana on November 10,
2005.
More than 1,400 members of the Hoosier
state business community gathered for the annual awards banquet, including a delegation of
over 50 LaPorte Chamber of Commerce members, which, I am told, is the largest group
ever from a community receiving the award
during its 16-year existence.
The state Chamber noted that LaPorte received this distinction largely because it has
‘‘enjoyed an economic revival under [LaPorte
Mayor Leigh Morris] and the businesslike approach he implemented at City Hall.’’
Mr. Speaker, I would have to agree with the
Chamber’s conclusion.
In the past year, LaPorte has seen their
business environment thrive. Three businesses have started new operations in the
area, and 4 existing businesses continued
their growth, adding over 100 new jobs between them.
Mayor Morris has had help in his efforts to
bring new and grow existing businesses in
LaPorte County. He formed a cooperative, bipartisan effort between himself, Michigan City
Mayor Chuck Oberlie, the LaPorte County
commissioners, and Purdue-North Central University. This coalition is committed to seeing
continued economic growth in LaPorte County.
I would also like to acknowledge the efforts
of LaPorte Chamber of Commerce President
Mike Seitz and the Greater LaPorte Economic
Development Corporation Executive Director
Owen Rock. They have worked together with
Mayor Morris to help move LaPorte forward.
Mr. Speaker, LaPorte is clearly a community
on the rise, and I congratulate Mayor Morris
and the entire community on being named the
Indiana Chamber of Commerce’s ‘‘2005 Community of the Year.’’

PO 00000

HON. JOHN CONYERS, JR.

OF NEW YORK

f

TRIBUTE TO E.G. ‘‘JERRY’’
GLADBACH

CONCERN OVER THE KASHMIR
EARTHQUAKE

HON. LOUISE McINTOSH SLAUGHTER

f

VerDate Aug 31 2005

November 17, 2005

CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — Extensions of Remarks

Frm 00010

Fmt 0626

Sfmt 9920

f

IN RECOGNITION OF THE 40TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE AMERICAN
COMMUNITY
HEALTH
CENTER
MOVEMENT

HON. STEPHEN F. LYNCH
OF MASSACHUSETTS

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

Thursday, November 17, 2005
Mr. LYNCH. Mr. Speaker, I rise today in
honor of the 40th Anniversary of the American
Community Health Center Movement which
began in Dorchester, Massachusetts in my
home district with the founding of the Columbia Point Community Health Center in 1965.
Development of health centers in the mid
1960s was fueled by the lack of primary care
doctors practicing in urban and rural areas
across the country. In 1961 more than 60 percent of Boston physicians had their offices located in hospitals. As a result, two Bostonbased physician-activists, H. Jack Geiger and
Count Gibson of Tufts Medical School, were
determined to address both the lack and nature of primary care in Boston’s neighborhoods. Working with residents in the Columbia
Point neighborhood of Dorchester, these pioneering physicians helped to organize a new
community-based model of primary care.
Today this site is known as the Geiger-Gibson
Community Health Center and still provides
over 6,000 residents of Harbor Point and Dorchester with access to world-class health care.

E:\CR\FM\A17NO8.015

E17NOPT1

