 Los Angeles County LAFCO Home Page Commissioners Staff Meeting Schedule Agenda/Minutes Current Topics Notices FAQ's Publications Forms CALAFCO Contact Us Back to LA Co Page DA's Most Wanted MISSION STATEMENT: "To encourage the orderly development and reorganization of Local Governmental Agencies, essential to the social, fiscal, and economic well-being of the State." Member Appointing Authority CHAIRMAN: Henri F. Pellissier By the eight other commissioners COMMISSIONERS: Yvonne Brathwaite Burke Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors Larry Connelly Independent Special District Selection Committee James DiGiuseppe Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors Carol Herrera City Selection Committee Cindy Miscikowski Los Angeles City Council President Beatrice Proo, Vice Chair City Selection Committee William Wentworth Independent Special District Selection Committee Zev Yaroslavsky Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors ALTERNATE COMMISSIONERS: Kenneth I. Chappell By the eight other commissioners Richard H. Close Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors Cristina Cruz-Madrid City Selection Committee Hal Bernson Los Angeles City Council President Don Knabe Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors Jerry Gladbach Independent Special District Selection Committee LAFCO PROFILE: Established by state law ( Cortese/Knox-Hertzberg Act of 2000 ) to discourage urban sprawl and encourage the orderly formation and development of local government agencies, the Los Angeles County Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO) is a regulatory agency with county-wide jurisdiction. General Purpose and Responsibilities LAFCO is responsible for coordinating logical and timely changes in local governmental boundaries, including annexations and detachments of territory, incorporations of cities, formations of special districts, and consolidations, mergers, and dissolutions of districts, as well as reviewing ways to reorganize, simplify, and streamline governmental structure. In 1994, LAFCOs were given the authority to initiate proposals involving district consolidation, dissolution, establishment of subsidiary districts, mergers, and reorganizations (combinations of the above jurisdictional changes). In addition, LAFCO is responsible for reviewing contractual service agreements between property owners and service providers. The Commission also is charged with developing and updating spheres of influence for each city and special district within the county. Spheres are planning tools used to provide guidance for individual proposals involving jurisdictional changes, and are intended to encourage efficient provision of organized community services and prevent duplication of service delivery. Territory must be within a city or district's sphere in order to be annexed. Membership and Meetings Los Angeles County LAFCO consists of nine regular members: two members from the Board of Supervisors, two city representatives, one City of Los Angeles representative, two special district representatives and two public members (one of which represents the San Fernando Valley Statistical Area),. There are six alternates to the regular members. Commissioners are appointed to four-year terms. The public members are appointed by the other members of the Commission. Regular LAFCO meetings are scheduled for 9:00 am, on the second and fourth Wednesday of each month, in Room 381B of the Kenneth Hahn Hall of Administration, 500 West Temple Street, Los Angeles, CA 90012 . The length of the meetings varies from one-half to four hours, depending on the complexity of the items on the agenda and the amount of public testimony. Occasionally, evening meetings are held in the community; this occurs perhaps once or twice a year, for controversial items such as incorporations or a complex, city sphere update. A Commissioner is not automatically disqualified from voting on items that affect the agency he or she represents; however, a Commissioner may voluntarily disqualify himself or herself. Commissioners must disqualify themselves if they have received contributions of more than $250 from any person or entity involved in a proposal under consideration by LAFCO. This disqualification requirement is determined through completion of a Fair Political Practices Committee disclosure form previously submitted by the proposal's applicant. Both regular and alternate Commissioners, except supervisors, file Statements of Economic Interest Form 700 when assuming office and annually thereafter. Back to Top 