 Twitter Facebook //--> [Sign Up Now] to Receive Our FREE Daily SCVTV-SCVNews Digest by E-Mail SCVNews.com | Gladbach, of Valencia, Named Outstanding LAFCO Rep | 10-08-2013 Inside Weather Weather Forecast Calendar Today in S.C.V. History October 10 1923 - Newhall merchants debate taxing themselves for county to pave Spruce (Main) Street; state does it three years later [ story ] Gladbach, of Valencia, Named Outstanding LAFCO Rep Press Release | Tuesday, Oct 8, 2013 Get Our Free Daily Morning News Digest In Your E-Mail Print PDF Tweet This Facebook Digg This Bookmark Stumble RSS [L.A. County LAFCO] – The California Association of Local Agency Formation Commissions has awarded its 2013 Outstanding Commissioner Award to Jerry Gladbach. CALAFCO, a statewide association of 57 LAFCO’s in the State of California, presents the Outstanding Commissioner Award annually to one commissioner for “extraordinary service to his or her Commission.” CALAFCO presented Gladbach with the Outstanding Commissioner award at its annual conference on September 26, 2013. He was selected from amongst several nominees by the Nominating Committee of the CALAFCO Board of Directors, which includes representation from LAFCOs throughout the State of California. Gladbach is the Chair of the Local Agency Formation Commission for the County of Los Angeles, to which he was first appointed in 2001. He is an elected member of the Board of Directors of the Castaic Lake Water Agency (CLWA), where he has served since 1985. Gladbach and his wife, Donna, are residents of Valencia. They have 3 children and six grandchildren. He is an engineer who retired after 35 years of service to the Los Angeles Department of Water & Power. Gladbach is a member of the Board of Directors and past president of the Association of California Water Agencies (ACWA), the President of the Board of Directors of the ACWA Joint Powers Insurance Authority, and a former member of the Board of Directors of the Water Education Foundation. He is also the former President of the Board of Directors of CALAFCO. “Chairman Gladbach’s many years of dedicated leadership, sound judgment and trusted guidance on vital local boundary and land use issues have earned him this distinguished award,” said Los Angeles County Supervisor Michael D. Antonovich. “In addition to Jerry’s service as Chair of the Local Agency Formation Commission, Los Angeles County appreciates his participation with the Castaic Lake Water Agency and numerous other state and local associations and JPA’s that improve the quality of life for our all County residents.” LAFCOs are State-mandated Commissions charged with the responsibility of providing for the orderly formation and growth of cities and special districts within each county. LA LAFCO reviews and holds public hearings on proposals for changes of organization for the 88 cities and 91 special districts in Los Angeles County. The Commission is also responsible for conducting detailed service reviews of cities and districts and periodically updating their spheres of influence (a precursor to annexation). The Commission consists of nine regular members and six alternate members, including representatives from the Board of Supervisors, the City of Los Angeles, the other 87 cities and the independent special districts in Los Angeles County, and the San Fernando Valley. One of the regular members, and his or her alternate, represent the general public. The Public Member and Alternate Public Member are appointed by the other members of the Commission. The Commission generally meets once a month in downtown Los Angeles at the Kenneth Hahn Hall of Administration at 500 West Temple Street. Share this story: Facebook Twitter More LinkedIn Pinterest StumbleUpon MySpace Delicious Comment On This Story COMMENT POLICY: We welcome comments from individuals and businesses. All comments are moderated. Comments are subject to rejection if they are vulgar, combative, or in poor taste. REAL NAMES ONLY: All posters must use their real individual or business name. This applies equally to Twitter account holders who use a nickname. Related Content SCV NewsBreak for Tuesday, October 8, 2013 SCV NewsBreak for Thursday, November 29, 2012 CLWA Incumbents Bypass Election, Return for Another Term Supervisors Approve Tax Transfer to City of Santa Clarita Annexation in Sight for 3,200 Saugus Residents L.A. COUNTY HEADLINES > COUNTY NEWS RELEASE ARCHIVE County Invites Comment on Changes to Dispute Resolution Program Wednesday, Oct 9, 2013 The Los Angeles County Dispute Resolution Program (DRP), administered by the Human Relations Branch of LA County’s Department of Community and Senior Services, has released program changes being proposed for Los Angeles County, and invites public comment on those changes. FULL STORY... Antonovich Pet of the Week (10-8-2013): Stimpy Tuesday, Oct 8, 2013 At Tuesday’s meeting of the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors, Supervisor Michael D. Antonovich presented Stimpy, an 8-month old domestic short hair, as his pet of the week. FULL STORY... Early Signs of Influenza in Los Angeles County Friday, Oct 4, 2013 The Los Angeles County Department of Public Health received a report of the first hospitalized case of influenza in late July. FULL STORY... County Getting $130k for OHV Enforcement This Year Thursday, Oct 3, 2013 The Sheriff's Department is set to receive $129,779 this fiscal year to pay for the enforcement of off-road vehicle laws, primarily in the Angeles National Forest. FULL STORY... County Getting $2.5 Mil. for DUI Checkpoints, Traffic Safety in FY2013-14 Thursday, Oct 3, 2013 The county of Los Angeles is in line to receive $1.1 million in federal funding (via the state) for DUI checkpoints and other traffic safety measures in the unincorporated county areas for the current fiscal year. FULL STORY... LATEST TWEETS --> Friend Activity @scvtv20 | SCVTV. Follow breaking news on Facebook. Subscribe to news in your inbox. Subscribe using RSS. Link your profile on LinkedIn. --> Latest Additions to SCVNews.com Today in SCV History (Oct. 10) 1923 - Newhall merchants debate taxing themselves for county to pave Spruce (Main) Street; state does it three years later [ story ] The Boss Pays a Visit | Commentary by Evelyne Vandersande State Parks Director Anthony Jackson is the top guy, the boss for all of these operations, so you can well imagine we were extremely honored, pleased and … well, yes, nervous and curious. Sheriff’s Chili Cookoff Rakes It In for Special Olympics (Video) The Sheriff's annual Fun in the Sun Chili Cookoff in Castaic raised approximately $30,000 this year for Special Olympics. SCV NewsBreak for Wednesday, October 9, 2013 In this episode: Twelve residents are vying for an open seat on the Hart School District Governing Board; Santa Clarita City Council members unanimously approved a funding switch to fix an improper land buy made last year. Oct. 23: Jazz Legend Wadada Leo Smith to Preview New Work at CalArts The performance will be held in the Main Gallery on the CalArts campus in Valencia on Wednesday, October 23, at noon. Lady Cougars Edge Bakersfield on Soccer Field, 1-0 In a match of the unbeaten Western State Conference, South Division teams, the College of the Canyons women’s soccer team downed Bakersfield College, 1-0, on Tuesday afternoon at COC’s Upper Field. Fun Stuff to Do This Fall in Santa Clarita Valley Check out some of the fun things to do in the Santa Clarita Valley this fall. County Invites Comment on Changes to Dispute Resolution Program The Los Angeles County Dispute Resolution Program (DRP), administered by the Human Relations Branch of LA County’s Department of Community and Senior Services, has released program changes being proposed for Los Angeles County, and invites public comment on those changes. Council Fixes Problem of Open-Space Land Purchased with Wrong Money In what some are calling an example of the system working, with others questioning the oversight of such purchases, Santa Clarita City Council members approved a fund switch with a 5-0 vote to fix an improper land buy made last year. Oct. 15: City to Extend Golden Valley Bike Trail The City of Santa Clarita, in partnership with Spirit Properties, will host a groundbreaking event on Tuesday, Oct. 15, at 10 a.m. for the Golden Valley Road Bike Trail Extension project on the northeast corner of Golden Valley Road and Centre Pointe Parkway. Hospital Official Warns of Salmonella Outbreak in Western U.S. A local hospital official put out a warning Wednesday to increase awareness about the dangers associated with a recent Food and Drug Administration recall. Blotter: East Side Car Burglaries; Laptop Stolen from Mitchell School Canyon Country East, Zone 8 Public Safety and Crime Prevention Information Snapshot 09/23/2013 – 09/29/2013. Santa Clarita Valley Sheriff’s Station Crime Prevention Unit Blotter: More Info on Papa John’s Pizza Robbery Canyon Country West, Zone 7 Public Safety and Crime Prevention Information Snapshot for 09-30-2013 to 10-06-2013 Santa Clarita Valley Sheriff’s Station Crime Prevention Unit Today in SCV History (Oct. 9) 1861 - Pioneer Acton rancher & stonecutter George Blum born in Switzerland [ story ] Democratic Doublespeak The Senate doesn’t pass a budget in five years, and they get a pass? SCV NewsBreak for Tuesday, October 8, 2013 In this episode: Officials in Sacramento say Santa Clarita residents should have to foot the bill themselves to get the salt out of the local wastewater; more 12 Want Chris Fall’s Hart Board Seat; Selection Oct. 16 The 12 applicants are Linda A. Calvo Ed.D., Ronda Chobanian, Eileen Connolly, Bruce Fox, Robert Hall, Jim Heffernan, Sharon Hill, Ann E. Kerman, Jinghong Li, Philip Phillipson, Lee Schramling and Lance K. Williams. Oct. 12: SCV Youth Project Poker Tournament The Santa Clarita Valley Youth Project will hold a day full of events Oct. 12 to raise money for the services the organization provides for at-risk youth. Antonovich Pet of the Week (10-8-2013): Stimpy At Tuesday’s meeting of the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors, Supervisor Michael D. Antonovich presented Stimpy, an 8-month old domestic short hair, as his pet of the week. Top 10 Reasons to Attend Oct. 13 Kid Expo Child & Family Center's tenth annual Kid Expo is Sunday, Oct. 13, at Golden Valley High School. 100 Mules Heading Toward Santa Clarita Valley (Video) This month, a team of 100 mules will be driven southwest from Bishop, traversing the 240 miles of pipelines and canals that bring water from the Eastern Sierras through the gravity-fed aqueduct to Los Angeles. Herrington Named Best Football Coach in California (Video) Hart High School head football coach Mike Herrington has been named the State of California's Best High School Football Coach in a poll conducted by USA Today and voted on by fans Company Hired to Provide Chloride Removal System Desalitech, a Boston-based provider of high-efficiency water production and treatment solutions, announced Oct. 3 that it will supply an advanced pilot wastewater treatment system to the Sanitation Districts of Los Angeles County. Newhall Coffee Providing 150,000 Meals to Hungry Children Each 2-pound bag of "I Was HUNGRY" coffee sold at Costco, Sam's Club and online at newhallcoffee.com will provide 10 meals to suffering children in America and all over the world via Children's Hunger Fund. | HOME | NEWS | SPORTS | BUSINESS | ENTERTAINMENT | GAME OF THE WEEK | Contact | Watch SCVTV | SCVNews.com is another service of SCVTV: Local Television for Santa Clarita. Site contents ©SCVTV. Web Toolbar by Wibiya SCVTV Media Center 22505 14th Street Unit E Santa Clarita, Calif. 91321 Phone: 661-251-TV20 FAX: 661-290-2536 Operating Hours Monday - Thursday: 10:00 AM to 6:00 PM Friday: By Appointment Only Email: info@scvtv.com SCVTV Network Media Center SCV News Nonprofit Heart of Gold Partners City of Santa Clarita KHTS AM 1220 Saugus Union School District Sulphur Springs Union School District College of the Canyons W.S. Hart Union High School District Media Center About Contact Rentals Location Staff ON Demand Shows News Photos Social Media Facebook Twitter MySpace YouTube Digg It --> SCVTV is a tax-exempt 501(c)(3) nonprofit corporation. All rights reserved. 