 ACWA elects Gladbach, Fiorini as top officers | WaterWorld Infrastructure Funding"},"section_hierarchy":[{"id":30713,"name":"Drinking Water Treatment","alias":"drinking-water-treatment"},{"id":30717,"name":"Infrastructure Funding","alias":"drinking-water-treatment/infrastructure-funding"}],"taxonomy":[{"type":"Bin","name":"primaryBytopSchedule","fullName":"Bin: primaryBytopSchedule (2075497)","id":2075497},{"type":"Bin","name":"primaryBy_primaryTaxonomy","fullName":"Bin: primaryBy_primaryTaxonomy (2075496)","id":2075496},{"type":"Tag","name":"fixed systems limitations","fullName":"Tag: fixed systems limitations (2067623)","id":2067623},{"type":"Bin","name":"import_pennwell","fullName":"Bin: import_pennwell (2066844)","id":2066844}],"authors":[]}"> Skip to main content Serving the municipal drinking water industry Drinking Water Treatment Water Utility Management Water Reuse Asset Management Smart Water Sections Drinking Water Treatment Water Utility Management Water Reuse Asset Management Smart Water Top Projects Emerging Leaders What Is Series Special Podcast Videos Magazine Webinars eHandbooks Whitepapers Smart Water Summit Wastewater Summit Contact Magazine Subscription Newsletter Subscription About Us Advertise Affiliated Brands STORMWATER SOLUTIONS WASTEWATER DIGEST SMART WATER SUMMIT STORMCON WATER TECHNOLOGY Follow us on https://www.facebook.com/waterworldmag https://www.linkedin.com/showcase/waterworld-magazine/about/ https://twitter.com/WaterWorld Infrastructure Funding ACWA elects Gladbach, Fiorini as top officers Members of the statewide Association of California Water Agencies (ACWA) today elected Castaic Lake Water Agency Director E. G. "Jerry" Gladbach to a two-year term as president. Dec. 5, 2003 3 min read Add Us On Google SAN DIEGO, Dec. 5, 2003 -- Members of the statewide Association of California Water Agencies (ACWA) today elected Castaic Lake Water Agency Director E. G. "Jerry" Gladbach to a two-year term as president. Randy Fiorini, board president of Turlock Irrigation District, was elected vice president during the association's annual fall conference in San Diego. Gladbach, who has served as ACWA's vice president since January 2002, has been active in California water issues for 42 years. He was first elected to the Castaic Lake Water Agency Board of Directors in 1985 and was board president from 1987 to 1991. A civil engineer with a long record of experience in water and power issues, Gladbach has been an active ACWA participant since 1973. He is a past chair of ACWA's Region 8, which includes Los Angeles and Ventura counties and is active in ACWA's Executive Committee, Outreach Task Force and ACWA Joint Powers Insurance Authority. Gladbach also is a member of the Water Education Foundation's Board of Directors and the Groundwater Resources Association. A former manager with the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power, he has served as vice president of ACWA Utility Service Agency and commissioner of the Los Angeles Local Agency Formation Commission. "As 2004 begins, water in California is entering an era of incredible challenges. What we decide in the next several months will have a permanent impact on the reliability and quality of our water supply as well as the infrastructure system to deliver water to those in need," Gladbach said. "I am honored to help lead ACWA as it plays an ever-increasing role in shaping the solutions to the water challenges in California." Managing partner of Fiorini Ranch, a family farming company established in 1909, Fiorini has served as an ACWA board member and chairman of its Federal Affairs Committee since 1997. He also is past president and commissioner of the San Joaquin River Group Authority, and past president and board member of the California Farm Water Coalition. Fiorini also continues to be involved in many other water and agricultural organizations. Though Fiorini was selected by ACWA's Nominating Committee as the official candidate for vice president, Greg Zlotnick, board member and chairman of ACWA's Water Management Committee was nominated from the floor at ACWA's general session lunch on December 3. ACWA held an election, allowing each of its 447 public water agency members to cast one vote and the results were 106 in favor of Fiorini and 90 in favor of Zlotnick. Gladbach succeeds outgoing ACWA President Bette Boatmun, who is a director of the Contra Costa Water District. ACWA is a statewide organization whose 447 public water agencies are responsible for about 90% of the water delivered in California. For more information, visit www.acwanet.com. Sign up for our eNewsletters Get the latest news and updates Sign Up Related What is one lesson your career has taught you that you wished you had learned sooner? What is one lesson your career has taught you that you wished you had learned sooner? What is an evaporation pond? What is an evaporation pond? Be Prepared with a Next-Generation Firewall Sponsored Be Prepared with a Next-Generation Firewall Be Prepared with a Next-Generation Firewall Sponsored Be Prepared with a Next-Generation Firewall Trending WaterWorld announces 2026 Top Projects winners Sealed for decades: A best-practice guide to pipe penetrations Water reuse guide for states: advancing regulations and collaboration Sponsored Picks Sponsored Be Prepared with a Next-Generation Firewall Sponsored Be Prepared with a Next-Generation Firewall Sponsored Questionnaire: Women in Water 2026 Load More Content footer logo WaterWorld Serving the municipal drinking water industry Newsletters The top stories, industry insights and relevant research, assembled by our editors and delivered to your inbox. Sign Up Connect Follow us for the latest industry news and insights. https://www.facebook.com/waterworldmag https://www.linkedin.com/showcase/waterworld-magazine/about/ https://twitter.com/WaterWorld Affiliated Brands STORMWATER SOLUTIONS WASTEWATER DIGEST SMART WATER SUMMIT STORMCON WATER TECHNOLOGY About Us Advertise Do Not Sell or Share Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions © 2026 All rights reserved. 