 Water Agencies Elect Boatmun, Gladbach as Top Officers | Wastewater Digest Skip to main content Municipal wastewater industry news, trends and regulations Wastewater Treatment Collection Systems Sludge & Biosolids Reuse & Recycling Regulations Sections Wastewater Treatment Collection Systems Sludge & Biosolids Reuse & Recycling Regulations Top Projects Emerging Leaders What Is Articles Special Podcasts Videos Magazine Webinars eHandbooks Case Studies White Papers Wastewater Summit Smart Water Summit Contact About Us Advertise Newsletter Subscription Magazine Subscription Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions Affiliated Brands WATERWORLD STORMWATER SOLUTIONS STORMWATER UNIVERSITY STORMCON WATER TECHNOLOGY Follow us on https://www.facebook.com/wastewaterdigest https://www.linkedin.com/company/wastewaterdigest/ https://twitter.com/WWDmag https://www.youtube.com/@wastewaterdigest Home Water Agencies Elect Boatmun, Gladbach as Top Officers New ACWA President, Vice President to Begin Terms in January Source Association of California Water Agencies Nov. 29, 2001 2 min read Add Us On Google Members of the statewide Association of California Water Agencies (ACWA) have elected Contra Costa Water District Director Bette Boatmun to a two-year term as president. E. G. "Jerry" Gladbach, director of Castaic Lake Water Agency, was elected vice president during the association's annual fall conference. Boatmun, who has served as ACWA's vice president since January 2000, has been active in California water issues for 27 years. She was first elected to the Contra Costa Water District Board of Directors in 1974 and was president from 1990 to 1992, during the height of a six-year drought. A former public school teacher, Boatmun is a past chair of ACWA's Region 5, which includes the Central Coast and the Bay Area. She is active in a number of local community organizations and is chair of the East County Water Management Association and the Contra Costa Special Districts Association. "California has entered an era of incredible change and challenge," Boatmun said. "The decisions we make today will literally mean the difference between a secure water future and a water supply crisis. I am honored to help lead ACWA as it plays an active role in shaping solutions." Gladbach is a civil engineer with a long record of experience in water and power issues. He has served on ACWA's Board of Directors for nearly 10 years and currently is chair of the association's Region 8, which includes Los Angeles and Ventura counties. He is also vice president of ACWA Utility Service Agency (ACWA-USA), a joint powers authority formed in 1996 to water agency demands for energy and other services. A former engineer and manager with the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power, Gladbach has been a director of Castaic Lake Water Agency in Santa Clarita since 1985. He is a member of the Water Education Foundation's Board of Directors and the Groundwater Resources Association. Boatmun succeeds outgoing ACWA President Jim Blake, who is a director of the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California. ACWA is a statewide organization whose 440 public water agencies are responsible for about 90 percent of the water delivered in California. For more information, visit www.acwanet.com . Source: Association of California Water Agencies Sign up for our eNewsletters Get the latest news and updates Sign Up Related Q&A: The future of thermal treatment for biosolids and PFAS management Q&A: The future of thermal treatment for biosolids and PFAS management What is biosolids management? What is biosolids management? Champion Strut vs. The Competition Sponsored Champion Strut vs. The Competition Champion Strut™ Live Inventory Sponsored Champion Strut™ Live Inventory Trending Utility leaders discuss practical AI applications at WEFTEC Florida DPR pilot offers lessons for utilities navigating evolving reuse rules WEF outlines priorities for wastewater sector at WEFTEC 2026 Sponsored Picks Sponsored Champion Strut vs. The Competition Sponsored Champion Strut™ Live Inventory Sponsored Electrical Conduit Cost Savings: A Must-Have Guide for Engineers & Contractors Load More Content footer logo Wastewater Digest Municipal wastewater industry news, trends and regulations. Newsletters The top stories, industry insights and relevant research, assembled by our editors and delivered to your inbox. Sign Up Connect Follow us for the latest industry news and insights. https://www.facebook.com/wastewaterdigest https://www.linkedin.com/company/wastewaterdigest/ https://twitter.com/WWDmag https://www.youtube.com/@wastewaterdigest Affiliated Brands WATERWORLD STORMWATER SOLUTIONS STORMWATER UNIVERSITY STORMCON WATER TECHNOLOGY About Us Advertise Do Not Sell or Share Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions © 2026 All rights reserved. 