 
 Cameron Smyth - City Council 
 Skip to content 
 Departments 
 Services 
 Cameron Smyth 
 Home » City Council » Cameron Smyth 
 Menu 
 Years Elected : 2000, 2016, 2020 (Served in California State Assembly 2006-2012) Mayoral Terms: 5 (2003, 2005, 2017, 2020, 2024) 
 Cameron Smyth is a Santa Clarita native. He was born and raised in the City and attended all local schools (Peachland Elementary, Placerita Jr. High and Hart High School). He attended college at U.C. Davis where he received a degree in Rhetoric and Communications. After graduating, Smyth returned to Santa Clarita and immediately became involved in the community, coaching high school volleyball and football. He also became involved in local politics joining the staff of then-Assemblyman Pete Knight and running his successful campaign for the State Senate. In 2000, Smyth was elected to the Santa Clarita City Council and served six years, including two terms as mayor. He focused his efforts on public safety, maintaining a balanced budget, economic development and growing the City’s parks and recreation program. Smyth left the Council in 2006 after being elected to the California State Legislature as an Assemblyman for the 38th District. While in Sacramento, Smyth distinguished himself as a leader willing to cross party lines to solve the many problems facing California. His efforts were recognized in 2010 when he was named Chairman of the Assembly Local Government Committee, the only Republican to Chair a major policy committee. During his time there, he initiated numerous reforms after scandals plagued various local governments. In 2012, Cameron returned to the private sector after serving his six-year term. Cameron and his wife Lena remain active members of the community through numerous organizations like the Santa Clarita Valley Athletic Association, AYSO, PTA, College of the Canyons and the Henry Mayo Hospital Foundation. They are also proud parents to three kids (Gavin age 20, Rowan age 17 and Kenley age 13). 
