CALIFORNIA

GENER AL Election

Tuesday,

NOVEMBER 7, 2006
Certificate of Correctness
I, Bruce McPherson, Secretary of State of the State of California, do
hereby certify that the measures included herein will be submitted
to the electors of the State of California at the General Election to
be held throughout the State on November 7, 2006, and that this
guide has been correctly prepared in accordance with the law.
Witness my hand and the Great Seal of the State in Sacramento,
California, this 14th day of August, 2006.

Bruce McPherson
Secretary of State

Official Voter Information Guide

Secretary of state
Dear California Voter,
There is no greater right than the right to vote — to participate in the electoral process,
to elect responsible leaders, and to make your voice heard. As the general election nears,
I urge you to exercise this fundamental right on Tuesday, November 7th.
In this Voter Information Guide, you will find information to assist you in making
informed choices on Election Day. Impartial analyses, arguments in favor and against
thirteen measures, statements from candidates, and other useful information is presented
here as your one-stop educational point of reference. These materials are also available
on the Secretary of State’s website at www.ss.ca.gov. The website also provides a link to
campaign finance disclosure information (http://cal-access.ss.ca.gov) so you can learn who
is funding each of the campaigns.
To prepare for Election Day, please carefully review the material in this Voter
Information Guide. As a registered voter, you have the opportunity to further strengthen
the foundation of our democracy by exercising your right to vote.
Please let my office or your local elections official know if you have questions, ideas,
or concerns about registering to vote or voting. To contact the office of the Secretary of
State, call our toll-free number—1-800-345-VOTE or visit our website at www.ss.ca.gov to
find contact information for your local elections official.
Thank you for being a part of California’s future by casting your vote in the November 7th
General Election.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
quick reference pull-out guide/Ballot Measure Summaries

PAGE
5

Propositions

1A Transportation Funding Protection. Legislative Constitutional Amendment.
1B Highway Safety, Traffic Reduction, Air Quality, and Port Security Bond Act of 2006.
1C Housing and Emergency Shelter Trust Fund Act of 2006.
1D Kindergarten–University Public Education Facilities Bond Act of 2006.
1E Disaster Preparedness and Flood Prevention Bond Act of 2006.

14
18
24
30
36

Sex Offenders. Sexually Violent Predators.

42

Water Quality, Safety and Supply. Flood Control. Natural Resource Protection.

48

Waiting Period and Parental Notification Before Termination of Minor’s Pregnancy.

54

83 Punishment, Residence Restrictions and Monitoring. Initiative Statute.
84 Park Improvements. Bonds. Initiative Statute.
85 Initiative Constitutional Amendment.

86 Tax on Cigarettes. Initiative Constitutional Amendment and Statute.
Alternative Energy. Research, Production, Incentives. Tax on California Oil Producers.

87 Initiative Constitutional Amendment and Statute.

60
70

88 Education Funding. Real Property Parcel Tax. Initiative Constitutional Amendment and Statute. 76
Political Campaigns. Public Financing. Corporate Tax Increase. Campaign Contribution and 82

89 Expenditure Limits. Initiative Statute.

90 Government Acquisition, Regulation of Private Property. Initiative Constitutional Amendment. 90
An overview of State Bond Debt

96

List of candidates for statewide elective office

98

Candidate Statements

100

board of equalization districts

112

Justices of the supreme and apellate courts

113

Text of Proposed Laws

114

Voter Bill of Rights

191

Information Pages
• Your Vote Makes A Difference .................................................................................................4
• Ballot Measures Defined......................................................................................................13
• The Process of Voting Absentee .........................................................................................190
Should any candidate or ballot measure information be incorrect or change after the printing of this Voter
Information Guide, please rely on the information provided in the Sample Ballot provided by your county
elections official.
Table of Contents | 3

YOUR VOTE MAKES A DIFFERENCE!
FOLLOW THESE 3 SiMPLE STEPS OF VOTING
REGISTER

If you are a United States citizen, a resident of California, not in prison or on parole for conviction
of a felony, and will be 18 years of age by November 7, 2006, you can register to vote. To register to
vote, you can:
• Call or visit your county elections office.
• Call the Secretary of State’s Toll-Free Voter Hotline at 1-800-345-VOTE.
• Register online at www.ss.ca.gov/elections/elections_vr.htm.
Your completed registration form should be received by your county elections office at least 15 days
before the election (October 23, 2006).
LEARN

There are several ways you can learn about candidates and ballot measures.
• Your County Sample Ballot provides the location of your polling place, polling place hours,
who your local and state legislative candidates are, how to apply for an absentee ballot, and
how to use the voting equipment in your county.

• The State Voter Information Guide provides the information you need to know about statewide
candidates and ballot measures. An audio version is available for the visually impaired
by calling 1-800-345-VOTE. The State Voter Information Guide is also available online at
www.voterguide.ss.ca.gov.
• Cal-Access is an online tool which provides information on who is contributing campaign
funds to support or oppose statewide candidates and ballot measures. Go online at
www.cal-access.ss.ca.gov for more information.

• Talk with Family and Friends because the decisions you make in the voting booth are important
and help keep our country strong.
VOTE

Election Day is Tuesday, November 7, 2006. The polls are open from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
• Find Your Polling Place—The location of your polling place is provided on the back of your
county sample ballot. You can also find your polling place by calling your county elections
office or online at http://www.ss.ca.gov/elections/elections_ppl.htm.

• To Vote by Mail—Your county sample ballot contains an application for an “absentee ballot.”
In order to receive your absentee ballot in time to vote, this application must be received
by your county elections office by October 31, 2006. In order to be counted, your absentee ballot
must be received by your county elections office no later than 8:00 p.m. on Election Day,
November 7, 2006.

4 | Your Vote Makes A Difference!

CALIFORNIA

Quick reference
Pull-out Guide

Tuesday, NOVEMBER 7, 2006
GENERAL ELECTION
This pull-out reference guide contains summary and contact information
for each state proposition appearing on the November 7, 2006 ballot.

PULL OUT THIS GUIDE AND

Take it with you
to the polls!
Official Voter Information guide
Visit our website at www.ss.ca.gov
Quick Reference Pull-Out Guide | 5

Ballot Measure Summary
PROP Transportation Funding Protection.

PROP Highway Safety, Traffic Reduction, Air

1A

1B

Legislative Constitutional Amendment.

SUMMARY

Put on the Ballot by the Legislature

Protects transportation funding for traffic congestion relief
projects, safety improvements, and local streets and roads.
Prohibits the state sales tax on motor vehicle fuels from being
used for any purpose other than transportation improvements.
Authorizes loans of these funds only in the case of severe
state fiscal hardship. Requires loans of revenues from states
sales tax on motor vehicle fuels to be fully repaid within the
three years. Restricts loans to no more than twice in any
10-year period. Fiscal Impact: No revenue effect or cost
effects. Increases stability of funding to transportation in 2007
and thereafter.

Quality, and Port Security Bond Act of 2006.

SUMMARY

Put on the Ballot by the Legislature

This act makes safety improvements and repairs to state
highways, upgrades freeways to reduce congestion, repairs
local streets and roads, upgrades highways along major
transportation corridors, improves seismic safety of local
bridges, expands public transit, helps complete the state’s
network of car pool lanes, reduces air pollution, and
improves anti-terrorism security at shipping ports by
providing for a bond issue not to exceed nineteen billion
nine hundred twenty-five million dollars ($19,925,000,000).
Fiscal Impact: State costs of approximately $38.9 billion
over 30 years to repay bonds. Additional unknown state and
local operations and maintenance costs.

WHAT YOUR VOTE MEANS
WHAT YOUR VOTE MEANS
YES
A YES vote on this
measure means: The State
Constitution would specify
additional limitations on the
state’s ability to suspend the
transfer of gasoline sales tax
revenues from the General
Fund to transportation. In
addition, all past suspensions
would be required to be
repaid by June 30, 2016, at
a specified minimum rate of
repayment each year.

NO
A NO vote on this
measure means: The
State Constitution would
not further limit the
state’s ability to suspend
the transfer of gasoline
sales tax revenues. State
law, instead of the State
Constitution, would specify
when past suspensions
would be repaid.

CON
Vote “NO” on Proposition
1A! Keep Education, health
care, and disaster relief
our State’s top priorities.
In hard economic times,
“autopilot” budgeting causes
massive unnecessary cuts
to schools, firefighters,
trauma centers, and health
care. The Governor and
Legislature must have
flexibility to meet the
needs of Californians. Vote
“NO” on Proposition 1A.

FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
FOR
Let’s Rebuild California
1127 11th Street, Suite 950
Sacramento, CA 95814
(916) 448-1401
info@readforyourself.org
www.readforyourself.org

6 | Ballot Measure Summary

NO
A NO vote on this measure
means: The state could
not sell $19.9 billion in
general obligation bonds,
for these purposes.

ARGUMENTS

ARGUMENTS
PRO
YES on 1A dedicates
taxes we already pay at the
pump for transportation
improvements like building
roads, congestion relief, and
safety repairs. 1A closes a
loophole in the law to
prevent politicians from
spending gas taxes on other
programs. Rebuild California:
YES on 1A—safer roads,
reduced congestion,
www.ReadForYourself.org.

YES
A YES vote on this measure
means: The state could
sell $19.9 billion in general
obligation bonds, for state
and local transportation
improvement projects
to relieve congestion,
improve the movement
of goods, improve air
quality, and enhance the
safety and security of the
transportation system.

AGAINST
Jackie Goldberg, Chair
Assembly Education
Committee

PRO
YES on 1B jump-starts traffic
relief, mass transit, and safety
improvements in every corner
of the state without raising
taxes. 1B builds new roads and
transportation improvement
projects that enhance mobility
and protect our economic
future. Rebuild California:
YES on 1B—safer roads,
reduced congestion, and a
strong economy,
www.ReadForYourself.org.

CON
California cannot afford
to continue borrowing its
way into a false sense of
economic security. More
borrowing means worsening
budget deficits. A no vote
will force the Legislature
to focus on paying for
our transportation needs
with existing funds in a
fiscally responsible manner.
Please vote NO on 1B.

FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
FOR
Let’s Rebuild California
1127 11th Street, Suite 950
Sacramento, CA 95814
(916) 448-1401
info@readforyourself.org
www.readforyourself.org

AGAINST
California Taxpayer
Protection Committee
Thomas N. Hudson,
Executive Director
9971 Base Line Road
Elverta, CA 95626-9411
(916) 991-9300
info@protecttaxpayers.com
www.protecttaxpayers.com

Ballot Measure Summary
PROP Housing and Emergency Shelter Trust Fund

PROP Kindergarten–University Public Education

1C

1D

Act of 2006.

SUMMARY

Put on the Ballot by the Legislature

Facilities Bond Act of 2006.

SUMMARY

Put on the Ballot by the Legislature

For the purpose of providing shelters for battered women and
their children, clean and safe housing for low-income senior
citizens; homeownership assistance for the disabled, military
veterans, and working families; and repairs and accessibility
improvements to apartment for families and disabled citizens,
the state shall issue bonds totaling two billion eight hundred
fifty million dollars ($2,850,000,000) paid from existing
state funds at an average annual cost of two hundred and four
million dollars ($204,000,000) per year over the 30 year life
of the bonds. Requires reporting and publication of annual
independent audited reports showing use of funds, and limits
administration and overhead costs.

This ten billion four hundred sixteen million dollar
($10,416,000,000) bond issue will provide needed funding
to relieve public school overcrowding and to repair older
schools. It will improve earthquake safety and fund vocational
educational facilities in public schools. Bond funds must be
spent according to strict accountability measures. Funds will
also be used to repair and upgrade existing public college
and university buildings and to build new classrooms to
accommodate the growing student enrollment in the California
Community Colleges, the University of California, and the
California State University. Fiscal Impact: State costs of about
$20.3 billion to pay off both the principal ($10.4 billion) and
interest ($9.9 billion) on the bonds. Payments of about $680
million per year.

WHAT YOUR VOTE MEANS

WHAT YOUR VOTE MEANS

YES
A YES vote on this measure
means: The state could sell
$2.85 billion in general
obligation bonds to support
a variety of housing and
development programs.

YES
A YES vote on this measure
means: The state could
sell $10.4 billion in
general obligation bonds
for education facilities
($7.3 billion for K–12 school
facilities and $3.1 billion for
higher education facilities).

NO
A NO vote on this measure
means: The state could
not sell $2.85 billion in
general obligation bonds
for these purposes.

ARGUMENTS

ARGUMENTS
PRO
YES on Proposition 1C
provides emergency shelters
for battered women, affordable
homes for seniors and former
foster youths, and shelters
with social services for
homeless families without
raising taxes. Rebuild
California: Join Habitat for
Humanity, AARP, and CA
Partnership to End Domestic
Violence, vote Yes on 1C.

NO
A NO vote on this measure
means: The state could
not sell $10.4 billion in
general obligation bonds
for these purposes.

CON
Vote “no” on Proposition
1C. Almost $3 billion in
new government debt and
big bureaucracy won’t
make California housing
affordable. Proposition 1C
gives your money to a select
few chosen by bureaucrats
then sticks every California
family of four with $600
of debt and interest. Vote
“no” on irresponsible debt.

PRO
Yes on 1D makes our school
buildings earthquake-safe
and reduces overcrowding
in classrooms for students.
It updates schools with new
technology, builds vocational
education facilities, and
funds our rapidly growing
community college system.
Rebuild California: YES on
1D—an investment in our
children is an investment
in California’s future.

CON
We should make school
construction a top priority
for current spending.
We cannot afford
$10,416,000,000 in new debt,
which today’s schoolchildren
will still be paying back
long after their own children
have graduated. Most
schools will receive nothing
from this bond. Fairness
requires local districts to
pay for local projects.

FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

FOR
Let’s Rebuild California
1127 11th Street, Suite 950
Sacramento, CA 95814
(916) 448-1401
info@readforyourself.org
www.readforyourself.org

FOR
Lance Olson
Olson Hagel & Fishburn LLP
555 Capitol Mall #1425
Sacramento, CA 95814
(916) 442-2952
www.readforyourself.org

AGAINST
Assemblyman Chuck DeVore
California State Assembly
4790 Irvine Blvd., Ste. 105-191
Irvine, CA 92620
(916) 991-9300
NoProp1C@aol.com
www.NoProp1C.com

AGAINST
Thomas N. Hudson,
Executive Director
California Taxpayer
Protection Committee
9971 Base Line Road
Elverta, CA 95626-9411
(916) 991-9300
info@protecttaxpayers.com
www.protecttaxpayers.com
Ballot Measure Summary | 7

Ballot Measure Summary
PROP Disaster Preparedness and

PROP Sex Offenders. Sexually Violent Predators.

1E

83

Flood Prevention Bond Act of 2006.

SUMMARY

Put on the Ballot by the Legislature

This act rebuilds and repairs California’s most vulnerable
flood control structures to protect homes and prevent loss of
life from flood-related disasters, including levee failures, flash
floods, and mudslides; it protects California’s drinking water
supply system by rebuilding delta levees that are vulnerable to
earthquakes and storms; by authorizing a $4.09 billion dollar
bond act. Fiscal Impact: State costs of approximately $8 billion
over 30 years to repay bonds. Reduction in local property
tax revenues of potentially up to several million dollars
annually. Additional unknown state and local operations and
maintenance costs.
WHAT YOUR VOTE MEANS
YES
A YES vote on this measure
means: The state could
sell about $4.1 billion in
general obligation bonds
to fund flood management
projects, including repairs
and improvements to levees,
weirs, bypasses, and other
flood control facilities
throughout the state.

NO
A NO vote on this measure
means: The state could not
sell about $4.1 billion in
general obligation bonds
for these purposes.

ARGUMENTS
PRO
Yes on Proposition 1E protects
against floods and helps
ensure an adequate supply
of clean drinking water for
all Californians. It repairs
levees and increases flood
protection. 1E also helps
prevent water pollution in our
streams and ocean. Rebuild
California: YES on 1E—Clean
Water, Flood Protection, and
Disaster Preparedness.

CON
We cannot afford
$4,090,000,000 in new debt
and higher taxes to pay it
back. Local projects should
be funded locally, without
unfair subsidies. This bond
will not provide any new
drinking water. The repairs
funded by this bond will
need to be repaired again
before this bond is repaid.

Punishment, Residence Restrictions and
Monitoring. Initiative Statute.

SUMMARY

Put on the Ballot by Petition Signatures

Increases penalties for violent and habitual sex offenders and
child molesters. Prohibits residence near schools and parks.
Requires Global Positioning System monitoring of registered
sex offenders. Fiscal Impact: Net state operating costs within ten
years of up to a couple hundred million dollars annually; potential
one-time state construction costs up to several hundred million
dollars; unknown net fiscal impact on local governments.
WHAT YOUR VOTE MEANS
YES
A YES vote on this measure
means: Some sex offenders
would serve longer prison and
parole terms. Sex offenders
released from prison would
be monitored with Global
Positioning System (GPS)
devices while on parole and
for life after discharge from
state supervision. Registered
sex offenders would not be
allowed to reside within
2,000 feet of a school or park.
More sex offenders would
be eligible for commitment
by the courts to state mental
health facilities for treatment
under the Sexually Violent
Predator (SVP) program.
ARGUMENTS
PRO
YES on Proposition 83—
JESSICA’S LAW. Prop. 83
gives police the tools they
need to keep track of sex
criminals. Prop. 83 stops child
molesters from moving near a
school or park. Prop. 83 keeps
sexual predators in prison
longer. Endorsed by COPS
and VICTIMS—Vote YES
on 83.

FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
FOR
Let’s Rebuild California
1127 11th Street, Suite 950
Sacramento, CA 95814
(916) 448-1401
info@readforyourself.org
www.readforyourself.org

8 | Ballot Measure Summary

AGAINST
Thomas N. Hudson,
Executive Director
California Taxpayer
Protection Committee
9971 Base Line Road
Elverta, CA 95626-9411
(916) 991-9300
info@protecttaxpayers.com
www.protecttaxpayers.com

NO
A NO vote on this measure
means: Current sentencing
and residency laws regarding
sex offenders stay in effect.
State and local agencies would
continue to have authority
to monitor sex offenders
with GPS devices while
on parole and probation.
Requirements for placement
of sex offenders into the SVP
program would not change.

CON
Proposition 83 would cost
taxpayers an estimated
$500 million but would not
increase public safety because
it’s most restrictive and
expensive provisions apply to
misdemeanor offenders and
others convicted of minor,
nonviolent offenses. Similar
laws have been tried and have
failed in other states. Vote
“No” on Proposition 83!

FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
FOR
Campaign for Child Safety
921 11th Street, Suite 400
Sacramento, CA 95814
info@83YES.com
www.83YES.com

AGAINST
Gail Jones, Admin. Director
California Attorneys
For Criminal Justice
2225 Eighth Street, Suite 150
Sacramento, CA 95814
(916) 448-8868
gailjonescacj@sbcglobal.net
www.cacj.org

Ballot Measure Summary
PROP Water Quality, Safety and Supply.

PROP Waiting Period and Parental Notification

84

85

Flood Control. Natural Resource Protection.
Park Improvements. Bonds. Initiative Statute.

SUMMARY

Put on the Ballot by Petition Signatures

Before Termination of Minor’s Pregnancy.
Initiative Constitutional Amendment.

SUMMARY

Put on the Ballot by Petition Signatures

Funds water, flood control, natural resources, park and
conservation projects by authorizing $5,388,000,000 in
general obligation bonds. Emergency drinking water safety
provisions. Fiscal Impact: State cost of $10.5 billion over
30 years to repay bonds. Reduced local property tax revenues
of several million dollars annually. Unknown state and local
operations and maintenance costs, potentially tens of millions
of dollars annually.

Amends California Constitution prohibiting abortion for
unemancipated minor until 48 hours after physician notifies
minor’s parent/guardian, except in medical emergency or with
parental waiver. Mandates reporting requirements. Authorizes
monetary damages against physicians for violation. Fiscal
Impact: Potential unknown net state costs of several million
dollars annually for health and social services programs,
court administration, and state health agency administration
combined.

WHAT YOUR VOTE MEANS

WHAT YOUR VOTE MEANS

YES
A YES vote on this measure
means: The state could
sell $5.4 billion in general
obligation bonds for safe
drinking water, water
quality, and water supply;
flood control; natural
resource protection; and
park improvements.

YES
A YES vote on this
measure means: The
State Constitution would
be changed to require
that a physician notify,
with certain exceptions,
a parent or legal guardian
of a pregnant minor at
least 48 hours before
performing an abortion.

NO
A NO vote on this measure
means: The state could
not sell $5.4 billion in
general obligation bonds
for these purposes.

ARGUMENTS
PRO
Provides clean, safe drinking
water for California’s rapidly
growing population; supports
vital projects for coastal
protection, water quality, flood
prevention. Accountability,
public disclosure, annual
audits, no new taxes. Join
League of Women Voters
of California, Clean Water
Action, Nature Conservancy,
business groups, public health
experts, local water districts
throughout California.

NO
A NO vote on this measure
means: Minors would
continue to receive abortion
services to the same extent
as adults. Physicians
performing abortions for
minors would not be subject
to notification requirements.

ARGUMENTS
CON
This bond was placed on the
ballot by special interests that
will likely receive taxpayers’
money if the bond passes.
This so-called “water and
flood control bond” has no
funding for dams or water
storage and little funding for
flood control. This initiative
would spend billions without
effective oversight.

PRO
PARENTS! Right now anyone
can arrange a secret abortion
for your minor daughter and
you won’t even know. Don’t
permit your young daughter
to be subjected to dangerous
medical procedures without
your knowledge. Keep her life
and health in your hands and
not those of strangers. Vote
YES on 85.

CON
No law can mandate family
communication. Vulnerable
teenagers from abusive,
violent homes can’t talk to
their parents, can’t navigate
overcrowded courts, and may
resort to dangerous, illegal
abortions. Prop. 85 won’t
stop predators, won’t protect
teens, and is the first step in
overturning Roe and banning
all abortions. Vote NO.

FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

FOR
Fiona Hutton
Californians For Clean
Water, Parks and Coastal
Protection/Yes on Prop. 84
13039 Ventura Blvd.
Studio City, CA 91604
(818) 784-1222
Fhutton@
RedgateCommunications.com
www.Yeson84.com

FOR
Paul E. Laubacher, R.N.
YES on 85/Parents’ Right to
Know and Child Protection
1703 India Street
San Diego, CA 92101
Toll-Free (866) 828-8355
Janet@YESon85.net
www.YESon85.net

AGAINST
Thomas N. Hudson,
Executive Director
California Taxpayer
Protection Committee
9971 Base Line Road
Elverta, CA 95626-9411
(916) 991-9300
info@protecttaxpayers.com
www.protecttaxpayers.com

AGAINST
Steve Smith
No on 85—for Real
Teen Safety
555 Capitol Mall, Suite 510
Sacramento, CA 95814
(916) 669-4802
info@Noon85.com
www.Noon85.com

Ballot Measure Summary | 9

Ballot Measure Summary
PROP Tax on Cigarettes. Initiative Constitutional

PROP Alternative Energy. Research, Production,

86

87

Amendment and Statute.

SUMMARY

Put on the Ballot by Petition Signatures

Incentives. Tax on California Oil Producers.
Initiative Constitutional Amendment and Statute.

SUMMARY

Put on the Ballot by Petition Signatures

Imposes additional $2.60 per pack excise tax on cigarettes
and indirectly increases taxes on other tobacco products.
Provides funding for various health programs, children’s
health coverage, and tobacco-related programs. Fiscal Impact:
Increase in excise tax revenues of about $2.1 billion annually
in 2007–08 spent for the specified purposes outlined above.
Other potentially significant costs and savings for state and
local governments due to program changes.

Establishes $4 billion program to reduce petroleum
consumption through incentives for alternative energy,
education and training. Funded by tax on California oil
producers. Fiscal Impact: State oil tax revenues of $225
million to $485 million annually for alternative energy
programs totaling $4 billion. State and local revenue
reductions up to low tens of millions of dollars annually.

WHAT YOUR VOTE MEANS

WHAT YOUR VOTE MEANS

YES
A YES vote on this measure
means: The existing state
excise tax on cigarettes
and other tobacco products
would increase by $2.60
per pack to support new
or expanded programs for
health services, children’s
health coverage, and
tobacco-related activities.
Other existing programs
supported with tobacco
excise taxes would continue.

YES
A YES vote on this
measure means: The
state would impose a
tax on oil production
to support $4 billion in
expenditures to develop
and promote alternative
energy technologies and
promote the reduction
of petroleum use.

NO
A NO vote on this measure
means: State excise taxes
on cigarettes and other
tobacco products would
remain at the current level
of 87 cents per pack and
would continue to be used
for existing purposes,
including childhood
development programs
and various health and
tobacco-related programs.

ARGUMENTS
PRO
Proposition 86 reduces
smoking and saves lives.
A study by the California
Department of Health
Services says Proposition 86
will keep 700,000 kids from
becoming adult smokers and
prevent 300,000 smokingrelated deaths. The same
study says Proposition 86 will
save over $16 BILLION in
health care costs. Yes on 86.

CON
Proposition 86 is really
about hospitals using our
Constitution and laws
to pocket millions for
themselves and HMOs
through a $2.1 billion
tax hike. Section 9
even gives hospitals an
exemption to antitrust
laws! It’s another lottery
mess—and no guarantees
on how the money will
be spent. No on 86.

NO
A NO vote on this measure
means: The state would not
impose a tax on oil production
to fund these activities.

ARGUMENTS
PRO
Vote YES on Prop. 87
and make oil companies
pay their fair share for
cleaner, cheaper energy. Oil
companies pay billions in
oil drilling fees in Alaska
and Texas—but almost
nothing in California.
Prop. 87 makes oil
companies pay and
makes it illegal to pass
the cost to consumers.

CON
$4 BILLION oil tax
increase! HIGHER
GAS PRICES. HUGE
BUREAUCRACY, LACKS
ACCOUNTABILITY.
No requirement they
produce results. DENIES
REVENUES to SCHOOLS.
We need alternative energy,
but Proposition 87 is not
the way to get there. CA
Taxpayers’ Association, small
business, labor, schools,
police, firefighters, farmers,
Auto Club say: Vote NO.

FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

FOR
Bob Pence
Coalition For A
Healthy California
1717 I Street
Sacramento, CA 95814
(916) 448-2720
info@healthycalifornia.com
www.yesprop86.com

FOR
Yes on 87
Californians for
Clean Energy
6399 Wilshire Blvd.,
Suite 1010
Los Angeles, CA 90048
(323) 782-1045
info@yeson87.com
www.yeson87.com

10 | Ballot Measure Summary

AGAINST
No on 86—Stop the
$2 Billion Tax Hike
3001 Douglas Blvd. #225
Roseville, CA 95661
(916) 218-6640
info@86facts.org
www.86facts.org

AGAINST
Californians Against
Higher Taxes—No on 87,
a coalition of taxpayers,
educators, schools, public
safety officials, businesses,
labor, energy producers,
agriculture, and seniors.
111 Anza Blvd., Suite 406
Burlingame, CA 94010
(650) 340-0262
info@NoOilTax.com
www.NoOilTax.com

Ballot Measure Summary
PROP Education Funding. Real Property Parcel Tax.

PROP Political Campaigns. Public Financing.

88

89

Initiative Constitutional Amendment
and Statute.

SUMMARY

Put on the Ballot by Petition Signatures

Corporate Tax Increase. Campaign Contribution
and Expenditure Limits. Initiative Statute.

SUMMARY

Put on the Ballot by Petition Signatures

Imposes $50 tax on each real property parcel to provide
additional public school funding for kindergarten through
grade 12. Exempts certain elderly, disabled homeowners from
tax. Use of funds restricted to specific educational purposes.
Fiscal Impact: State parcel tax revenue of roughly $450 million
annually, allocated to school districts for specified education
programs.

Provides that eligible candidates for state elective office may
receive public campaign funding. Increases tax on corporations
and financial institutions by 0.2 percent to fund program.
Imposes new campaign contribution/expenditure limits. Fiscal
Impact: Increased revenues (primarily from increased taxes
on corporations and financial institutions) totaling more than
$200 million annually to pay for the public financing of
political campaigns.

WHAT YOUR VOTE MEANS

WHAT YOUR VOTE MEANS

YES
A YES vote on this measure
means: The state would
levy an annual $50 tax
on most parcels of land
in California, with the
proceeds allocated to school
districts for five specified
K–12 education programs.

YES
A YES vote on this measure
means: Candidates for state
offices could choose to receive
public funds to pay for the
costs of campaigns if they
meet certain requirements.
Candidates not accepting
public funds would be
subject to lower contribution
limits than currently. The
tax rate on corporations
and financial institutions
would be increased to pay
for the public financing
of political campaigns.

NO
A NO vote on this measure
means: The state would
not levy an annual $50 tax
on most parcels of land to
raise additional funding for
K–12 education programs.

ARGUMENTS
PRO
Proposition 88 will improve
our schools. It helps teachers
by providing funds directly to
local schools to reduce class
size and provide textbooks
and learning materials. It
requires strict accountability
and exempts disabled
and elderly homeowners.
Teachers, businesses, and
taxpayers agree: YES on
88 for Textbooks, Smaller
Classes, Better Schools.

NO
A NO vote on this measure
means: Candidates for state
offices would continue to
pay for their campaigns
with private funds subject to
current contribution limits.
The tax rate on corporations
and financial institutions
would not change.

ARGUMENTS
CON
The State Legislature decides
where your tax money
goes. New layers of costly
bureaucracy are created.
95%+ of schools could
NEVER receive facility
grants under Proposition
88! Proposition 88 creates
a NEW KIND OF NEVER
ENDING PROPERTY
TAX, opening the door to
UNLIMITED property parcel
tax increase propositions.
Proposition 88—NO!

PRO
Proposition 89 will curb
corruption in Sacramento and
reduce the power of special
interests and lobbyists over
our government. It will level
the playing field and assure
that elections are about ideas,
not money. It will enable
everyday people, like teachers,
nurses and firefighters, to
run for public office.

CON
Proposition 89 is phoney
reform. Prop. 89 increases
taxes for politicians to
finance their political
campaigns and negative ads.
The special interests behind
89 wrote it to give themselves
an unfair advantage,
limiting the voice of small
businesses and nonprofits
and damaging consumers.
It’s too complicated and
unworkable. Vote No on 89.

FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

FOR
Yes on 88—Taxpayers
for Better Schools and
Smaller Classes
1107 9th Street
Sacramento, CA 95814
(916) 448-3868
VoteFor88@EdVoice.org
www.VoteFor88.org

FOR
Michael Lighty
Californians for Clean
Elections, Yes on 89
2000 Franklin Street
Oakland, CA 94612
(800) 440-6877
info@yeson89.org
www.yeson89.org

AGAINST
Californians Against
the Statewide Parcel
Property Tax
925 University Ave.
Sacramento, CA 95825
(916) 927-1512
info@NoProp88.com
www.NoProp88.com

AGAINST
Californians to Stop 89
1415 L Street, Suite 1250
Sacramento, CA 95814
(916) 708-7824
info@noprop89.org
www.noprop89.org
Ballot Measure Summary | 11

Ballot Measure Summary
PROP Government Acquisition,

90

Regulation of Private Property.
Initiative Constitutional Amendment.

SUMMARY

Put on the Ballot by Petition Signatures

Bars state/local governments from condemning or damaging
private property to promote other private projects, uses. Limits
government’s authority to adopt certain land use, housing,
consumer, environmental, workplace laws/regulations. Fiscal
Impact: Increased annual government costs to pay property
owners for losses to their property associated with new laws and
rules, and for property acquisitions. These costs are unknown,
but potentially significant on a statewide basis.
WHAT YOUR VOTE MEANS
YES
A YES vote on this measure
means: State and local
governments would have
significantly increased
requirements to compensate
property owners for
economic losses to their
property resulting from
new laws or rules. Also,
government would be more
restricted in taking private
property for public uses.

NO
A NO vote on this measure
means: There would be no
changes in the requirements
on government for: (1)
paying for economic losses
to property resulting from
new laws and rules and
(2) taking private property
for public purposes.

ARGUMENTS
PRO
Proposition 90 stops eminent
domain abuse and protects
the American Dream—the
fundamental right of every
American to own a home. It
prevents government from
taking your home or property
without your permission and
turning it over to powerful
developers who want to
build strip malls or other
commercial projects.

CON
Prop. 90 is a deceptive
and costly taxpayer trap. It
would create new categories
of lawsuits costing taxpayers
billions of dollars every
year. It is anti-taxpayer
and anti-homeowner. Join
taxpayers, homeowners
groups, conservationists,
police, firefighters, and
businesses. Vote NO on 90.

FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
FOR
California Protect our
Homes Coalition
2443 Fair Oaks Blvd.,
Suite 191
Sacramento, CA 95825
(916) 924-7501
info@90yes.com
www.90yes.com

12 | Ballot Measure Summary

AGAINST
No on 90, Californians
Against the Taxpayer Trap
1121 L Street #803
Sacramento, CA 95814
info@noprop90.com
www.NoProp90.com

Ballot Measures Defined
Legislative Bond Measure

Any bill that calls for the issuance of general obligation bonds must be adopted in each house of
the Legislature by a two-thirds vote, signed by the Governor, and approved by a simple majority of
the public’s vote to be enacted. Whenever a bond measure is on a statewide ballot, an overview of
California’s bond debt is included in the ballot pamphlet.
Legislative Constitutional Amendment

Whenever the Legislature proposes an amendment to the California Constitution, it is known as a
legislative constitutional amendment. It must be adopted in the Senate and the Assembly by a twothirds vote before it can be placed on the ballot. A legislative constitutional amendment does not
require the Governor’s signature. This type of amendment requires a simple majority of the public’s
vote to be enacted.
Legislative Initiative Amendment

Whenever the Legislature proposes to amend a law that was previously enacted through the initiative
process, the Legislature is required to present the amendment to the voters for passage. The Legislature
may amend the previously-adopted initiative measure if the measure permits legislative amendment or
repeal without voter approval. This type of amendment requires a simple majority of the public’s vote
to be enacted.
Initiatives

Often referred to as “direct democracy,” the initiative process is the power of the people to place
measures on the ballot. These measures can either create or change statutes (including general obligation
bonds) and amend the California Constitution. If the initiative proposes to amend California statute,
signatures of registered voters gathered must equal in number to 5% of the votes cast for all candidates
for Governor in the previous gubernatorial election. If the initiative proposes to amend the California
Constitution, signatures of registered voters gathered must equal in number to 8% of the votes cast
for all candidates for Governor in the previous gubernatorial election. An initiative requires a simple
majority of the public’s vote to be enacted.
Referendum

Referendum is the power of the people to approve or reject statutes adopted by the Legislature.
However, referenda cannot be used to approve or reject urgency measures or statutes that call for
elections or provide for tax levies or appropriations for current expenses of the state. Voters wishing
to block implementation of a legislatively-adopted statute must gather signatures of registered voters
equal in number to 5% of the votes cast for all candidates for Governor in the previous gubernatorial
election within 90 days of enactment of the bill. Once on the ballot, the law is defeated if voters cast
more NO votes than YES votes on the referendum question.

Ballot Measures Defined | 13

PROPOSITION

1A

1A

TRANSPORTATION FUNDING PROTECTION.
LEGISLATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT.

Official Title and Summary

Prepared by the Attorney General

TRANSPORTATION FUNDING PROTECTION.
LEGISLATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT.
• Protects transportation funding for traffic congestion relief projects, safety improvements, and local
streets and roads.
• Prohibits the state sales tax on motor vehicle fuels from being used for any purpose other than
transportation improvements.
• Authorizes loans of these funds only in the case of severe state fiscal hardship. Requires loans
of revenues from states sales tax on motor vehicle fuels to be fully repaid within the three years.
Restricts loans to no more than twice in any 10-year period.

Summary of Legislative Analyst’s Estimate of Net State and Local Government Fiscal Impact:
• No direct revenue or cost effects. Increases stability of funding for state and local transportation
uses in 2007 and thereafter; reduces somewhat the state’s authority to use these funds for other,
nontransportation priorities.

FINAL VOTES CAST BY THE LEGISLATURE ON SCA 7 (PROPOSITION 1A)
Senate:

Ayes 38

Noes 0

Assembly:

Ayes 58

Noes 11

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst

BACKGROUND
California spends about $20 billion a year to
maintain, operate, and improve its highways,
streets and roads, passenger rail, and transit
systems. About one-half of the funding comes
from various local sources, including local sales
and property taxes, as well as transit fares. The
remainder comes from the state and federal levels,
largely from gasoline and diesel fuel taxes, and
truck weight fees.

14 | Title and Summary/Analysis

Currently, the state levies two types of taxes on
motor fuels:
• An excise tax of 18 cents per gallon on gasoline
and diesel fuel. (This is generally referred to as
the gas tax.)
• A statewide 6 percent tax on the sale of gasoline
and diesel fuel (“sales tax”).
Gas Tax. Revenues from the state excise tax on
gasoline and diesel fuel used on public roads total
about $3.4 billion per year. The State Constitution

TRANSPORTATION FUNDING PROTECTION. prop
LEGISLATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT.

1A

1A
Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

restricts the use of these revenues to specific
transportation purposes. These include constructing,
maintaining, and operating public streets and
highways, acquiring right of way and constructing
public transit systems, as well as mitigating the
environmental effects of these facilities.
Sales Tax. The state’s sales tax on gasoline and
diesel fuel currently provides about $2 billion
a year. Until 2002, most of the revenues from
the state sales tax on gasoline were not used for
transportation purposes. Instead, these revenues
were used for various general purposes including
education, health, social services, and corrections.
Proposition 42, which was approved by voters in
2002, amended the State Constitution to dedicate
most of the revenue from the sales tax on gasoline
to transportation uses. Specifically, Proposition 42
requires those revenues that previously went to the
General Fund be transferred to the Transportation
Investment Fund to provide for improvements to
highways, streets and roads, and transit systems.
Proposition 42, however, allows the transfer to be
suspended when the state faces fiscal difficulties.
Proposition 42 is silent as to whether suspended
transfer amounts are to be repaid to transportation.
Since 2002, the state has suspended the
Proposition 42 transfer twice because of the
state’s fiscal condition. In 2003–04, the transfer
was suspended partially, and in 2004–05, the full
amount of the transfer was suspended. Existing
law requires that these suspended amounts, with
interest, be repaid to transportation by 2008–09
and 2007–08, respectively.

For text of Proposition 1A see page 114.

PROPOSAL
This measure amends the State Constitution
to further limit the conditions under which the
Proposition 42 transfer of gasoline sales tax
revenues for transportation uses can be suspended.
Specifically, the measure requires Proposition 42
suspensions to be treated as loans to the General
Fund that must be repaid in full, including interest,
within three years of suspension. Furthermore, the
measure only allows suspension to occur twice in
ten consecutive fiscal years. No suspension could
occur unless prior suspensions (excluding those
made prior to 2007–08) have been repaid in full.
In addition, the measure lays out a new schedule
to repay the Proposition 42 suspensions that
occurred in 2003–04 and 2004–05. Specifically, the
suspended amounts must be repaid and dedicated
to transportation uses no later than June 30, 2016,
at a specified minimum annual rate of repayment.

FISCAL EFFECTS
This measure would have no direct revenue or cost
effect. By limiting the frequency and the conditions
under which Proposition 42 transfers may be
suspended in a ten-year period, the measure would
make it more difficult to use Proposition 42 gasoline
sales tax revenues for nontransportation purposes
when the state experiences fiscal difficulties. As a
result, the measure would increase the stability of
funding to state and local transportation in 2007 and
thereafter. However, the state’s authority to direct
available funds to meet other nontransportation
priorities in the event the state faces fiscal difficulties
would be somewhat reduced.

Analysis | 15

Prop Transportation funding protection.

1 A Legislative constitutional amendment.
1A

ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 1A
YES ON PROPOSITION 1A: USE EXISTING GAS
TAXES FOR ROADS AND TRANSPORTATION
PROJECTS
In 2002, California voters made their commitment to
California roads a priority by passing Proposition 42. Voters
said they wanted their gas taxes spent on making roads and
highways safer and less congested. But a loophole in the
law has made it easy—too easy—for the politicians to use
those funds for other purposes. In the last three years, nearly
$2.5 billion has been siphoned away from road and highway
projects—bringing critical safety and congestion relief
projects to a halt.
YES ON 1A STOPS OUR EXISTING GAS TAXES
FROM BEING USED FOR OTHER PROJECTS
Proposition 1A closes the loophole in the law and
ensures that the gas taxes you already pay are spent only
on transportation projects benefiting California’s 20 million
drivers.
YES ON 1A BUILDS NEW ROADS AND HIGHWAYS
California currently has the most congested roads in the
nation and our streets and highways are in major disrepair.
Drivers spend $20.7 billion in extra fuel each year and 500,000
hours stuck in traffic every day because of our overcrowded
roads. Prop. 1A ensures a stable source of long-term funding
to get urgently needed transportation improvement projects
off the drawing board, allowing engineers to:
• Make traffic safety improvements
• Repair the most dangerous sections of state highways
• Reduce congestion on major freeways
• Widen freeways to prevent bottlenecks
• Complete our network of carpool lanes
• Fix neglected streets and roads
• Improve public transit

YES ON 1A MEANS A STRONGER ECONOMY
California’s economy depends on a fi rst-rate transportation
system (something we used to have). Without a major
emphasis on improving our infrastructure so we can move
people and goods throughout the state, our economic future
will suffer.
YES ON 1A: PART OF A LONG-TERM PLAN TO
REBUILD CALIFORNIA
Proposition 1A is part of the Rebuild California Plan,
the fi rst comprehensive infrastructure plan in 40 years. The
plan uses the taxes we’re already paying to build the roads,
housing, schools, and water systems we need to sustain our
economy and our quality of life for the long-term.
REBUILD CALIFORNIA: YES ON 1A, 1B, 1C, 1D,
and 1E
California’s population will reach 50 million in the next
20 years—twice what our current infrastructure was designed
for—and it can’t be rebuilt overnight. That’s why we’ve got
to start now.
To learn more about how this infrastructure plan will benefit
you and your community, visit www.ReadForYourself.org.
YES ON 1A: ENSURE EXISTING GAS TAX DOLLARS
ARE USED TO IMPROVE CALIFORNIA’S ROADS,
HIGHWAYS AND MASS TRANSIT SYSTEMS
THOMAS V. McKERNAN, President
Automobile Club of Southern California (AAA)
MICHAEL BROWN, Commissioner
California Highway Patrol
MARIAN BERGESON, Chair
California Transportation Commission

REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 1A
Excellent public schools and universities have made
You must Vote “NO” on Proposition 1A unless you think
California the “Golden State.” Education is the engine that
that emergency rooms, hospitals, and trauma centers will
drives California’s economy.
never again need to have funding priority.
Proposition 1A removes Education from being the top
And, you must Vote “NO” on Proposition 1A unless you
budget priority!
think it was OK to withhold $2 billion from the minimum
guarantee to our K–12 schools and to continue to raise
The People passed Proposition 42 with exceptions for
student fees at our state colleges and universities. These
drastic times. It currently takes 2/3 of the Legislature and
terrible cuts to education would have been much worse if
the Governor to agree to borrow gasoline taxes.
Proposition 1A had been in effect.
Some say $2.5 billion has been “siphoned off” the gasoline
For our children, for our economy, and to make sure that
taxes. The borrowed money is being repaid with interest.
we can continue to deal with the aftermath of disasters, Vote
And, the “Rebuild California Plan” will not be affected if
“NO” on Proposition 1A.
Proposition 1A is defeated.
You must Vote “NO” on Proposition 1A unless you believe
there will never again be a recession in California.
JACKIE GOLDBERG, Chair
Assembly Education Committee
You must Vote “NO” on Proposition 1A unless you know
there will never again be a sizeable earthquake, flood, levee
break, or fire in California that requires a quick response to
save lives and property.
16 | Arguments
Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.

Transportation funding protection. Prop
legislative constitutional amendment.

1A
1A

ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 1A
When the next recession hits, the Legislature and
the Governor must be able to prioritize both cuts and
expenditures.
Proposition 1A would put still more of California’s budget
on “automatic pilot.” That means that the Governor and
the Legislature won’t be able to set priorities. If education,
healthcare, public safety, or childcare funds are in need of
money, during any recession, the first priority for gasoline
taxes will be potholes and highways. Highways and potholes
are very important. But on this ballot Proposition 1B will
provide almost $20 billion dollars for Transportation.
Proposition 42 of 2002 already has strong protections for
highway and pothole funds. Money can only be borrowed by
a 2/3 vote of both houses and the signature of the Governor.
It must be repaid and with interest for the full time it was
borrowed. Proposition 1A tightens the restrictions, and
makes borrowing almost impossible.
Everyone seems to agree in California that our number
one priority is Public Education! But, if Proposition 1A were
to pass, that would no longer be true. We only have to look at
recent history to understand the impact of Proposition 1A.
In 2003–04, the Legislature and the Governor borrowed
$868 million from the sales tax revenue on gasoline. And in
2004–05, we again borrowed $1.258 billion from the same
funds. Without the ability to borrow money internally, the
choices would have been to borrow from Wall Street, make
massive cuts to health and education, or raise taxes.

Even with about $2 billion in borrowing from gasoline tax
funds, K–12 public schools still were cut $2 billion from what
they were guaranteed. We also cut funds for textbooks and
maintenance of classrooms and school buildings. Community
college students saw their fees more than double, rising from
$11 per unit to $26 per unit, and hundreds of thousands of
community college students had to quit college as a result.
University of California and California State University
students saw their undergraduate fees rise a whopping 30%
in three years time.
We have not repaid the $2 billion cut made to K–12
education in 2004–05. And, if Proposition 1A had been in
effect, the cut to K–12 public education could have been $4
billion!
In bad years, the Legislature and the Governor need the
flexibility to shift funds temporarily to ensure that education
receives at least its minimum guarantee. The Legislature
and the Governor need to be able to set priorities as they
come up. If there is an earthquake, flood, or major fi res, or if
trauma centers and emergency rooms continue to close, we
need to be able to address those emergencies. Don’t tie the
hands of those whose job it is to reflect your priorities in the
State budget. VOTE “NO” ON PROPOSITION 1A!
JACKIE GOLDBERG, Chair
Assembly Education Committee

REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 1A
Proposition 1A is about upholding the will of voters and
setting priorities. In 2002, nearly 70% of voters approved
a measure that was supposed to dedicate our gas taxes to
transportation improvements. The voters said building new
roads, relieving congestion, and improving highway safety
are priorities.
Unfortunately, as the opponent points out, politicians
have been exploiting a loophole in that law. They’ve diverted
nearly $2.5 billion in gas taxes that were supposed to go to
transportation and spent that money on other programs. As a
result, our transportation system is badly neglected and the
backlog of congestion relief, highway safety, and road repair
projects has grown larger.
IT’S TIME TO UPHOLD THE WILL OF VOTERS
AND CLOSE THE GAS TAX LOOPHOLE ONCE AND
FOR ALL.
YES ON 1A simply makes sure the gas taxes we pay at
the pump are actually used to build new roads and improve
our transportation system.

Prop. 1A will not reduce funding for education or any
other state program. Education funding is constitutionally
protected and Proposition 1A does not change that.
• That’s why educators leading taxpayer, environmental,
business, and public safety groups support Prop. 1A.
Proposition 1A is part of the Rebuild California Plan, the
fi rst comprehensive infrastructure plan in 40 years.
VOTE YES ON 1A. Ensure our existing gas tax dollars
are used to improve California’s roads, highways, and mass
transit systems.
STEVE KRULL, President
California Police Chiefs Association
MARK WATTS, Interim Executive Director
Transportation California
ALLAN ZAREMBERG, President
California Chamber of Commerce

Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.

Arguments | 17

PROPOSITION

1B

HIGHWAY SAFETY, TRAFFIC REDUCTION,
AIR QUALITY, AND PORT SECURITY BOND ACT OF 2006.

Official Title and Summary

Prepared by the Attorney General

1B
HIGHWAY SAFETY, TRAFFIC REDUCTION,
AIR QUALITY, AND PORT SECURITY BOND ACT OF 2006.
• Makes safety improvements and repairs to state highways; upgrades freeways to reduce congestion;
repairs local streets and roads; upgrades highways along major transportation corridors.
• Improves seismic safety of local bridges.
• Expands public transit.
• Helps complete the state’s network of car pool lanes.
• Reduces air pollution.
• Improves anti-terrorism security at shipping ports.
• Provides for a bond issue not to exceed nineteen billion nine hundred twenty-five million dollars
($19,925,000,000).
• Appropriates money from the General Fund to pay off bonds.

Summary of Legislative Analyst’s Estimate of Net State and Local Government Fiscal Impact:
• State costs of about $38.9 billion over 30 years to pay off both the principal ($19.9 billion) and interest
($19.0 billion) costs of the bonds. Payments of about $1.3 billion per year.
• Additional unknown state and local government costs to operate and maintain transportation
infrastructure (such as roads, bridges, and buses and railcars) funded with bonds. A portion of these
costs would be offset by revenues generated by the improvements, such as fares and tolls.

FINAL VOTES CAST BY THE LEGISLATURE ON SB 1266 (PROPOSITION 1B)
Senate:

Ayes 37

Noes 1

Assembly:

Ayes 61

Noes 10

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst

BACKGROUND
California spends about $20 billion a year from
a combination of state, federal, and local funds to
maintain, operate, and improve its highways, streets
and roads, passenger rail, and transit systems. These
expenditures are primarily funded on a pay-as-yougo basis from taxes and user fees.

18 | Title and Summary/Analysis

There are two primary state tax sources that fund
state transportation programs. First, the state’s 18
cent per gallon excise tax on gasoline and diesel fuel
(generally referred to as the gas tax) generates about
$3.4 billion annually. Second, revenues from the
state sales tax on gasoline and diesel fuel currently
provide about $2 billion a year. Additionally, the
state imposes weight fees on commercial vehicles

HIGHWAY SAFETY, TRAFFIC REDUCTION, prop
AIR QUALITY, AND PORT SECURITY BOND ACT OF 2006.

1B

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

(trucks), which generate roughly $900 million
a year. Generally, these revenues must be used
for specific transportation purposes, including
improvements to highways, streets and roads,
passenger rail, and transit systems. These funds
may also be used to mitigate the environmental
impacts of various transportation projects. Under
specified conditions, these revenues may be loaned
or used for nontransportation uses.
Since 1990, voters have approved roughly
$5 billion in state general obligation bonds to fund
transportation. These bond proceeds have been
dedicated primarily to passenger rail and transit
improvements, as well as to retrofit highways and
bridges for earthquake safety. As of June 2006, all
but about $355 million of the authorized bonds
have been spent on projects.
In addition to state funds, California’s
transportation system receives federal and local
money. The state receives about $4.5 billion
a year in federal gasoline and diesel fuel tax
revenues for various transportation purposes.
Collectively, local governments invest roughly
$9.5 billion annually into California’s highways,
streets and roads, passenger rail, and transit
systems. This funding comes mainly from a
mix of local sales and property taxes, as well as
transit fares. Local governments have also issued
bonds backed mainly by local sales tax revenues
to fund transportation projects.

PROPOSAL
This measure authorizes the state to sell about
$20 billion of general obligation bonds to fund
transportation projects to relieve congestion,
improve the movement of goods, improve air
quality, and enhance the safety and security of the
transportation system. (See “An Overview of State
Bond Debt” on page 96 for basic information on
state general obligation bonds.)

For text of Proposition 1B see page 114.

Figure 1 (see next page) summarizes the purposes
for which the bond money would be used. The
bond money would be available for expenditure
by various state agencies and for grants to local
agencies and transit operators upon appropriation
by the Legislature:
• Congestion Reduction, Highway and Local
Road Improvements—$11.3 billion—for capital
improvements to reduce congestion and increase
capacity on state highways, local roads, and
public transit for grants available to locally funded
transportation projects, as well as for projects to
rehabilitate state highways and local roads.
• Public Transportation—$4 billion—to make
capital improvements to local transit services
and the state’s intercity rail service. These
improvements would include purchasing
buses and railcars, as well as making safety
enhancements to existing transit facilities.
• Goods Movement and Air Quality—$3.2
billion—for projects to improve the movement of
goods—through the ports, on the state highway
and rail systems, and between California and
Mexico—and for projects to improve air quality
by reducing emissions related to goods movement
and replacing or retrofitting school buses.
• Safety and Security—$1.5 billion—for projects
to increase protection against a security threat or
improve disaster response capabilities on transit
systems; as well as for grants to improve the
safety of rail crossings to seismically retrofit local
bridges, ramps, and overpasses; and to improve
security and disaster planning in publicly owned
ports, harbors, and ferry terminals.

FISCAL EFFECTS
Bond Costs. The costs of these bonds would
depend on interest rates in effect at the time they
are sold and the time period over which they are
repaid. The state would likely make principal and
Analysis | 19

1B

prop HIGHWAY SAFETY, TRAFFIC REDUCTION,

1B AIR QUALITY, AND PORT SECURITY BOND ACT OF 2006.
Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

1B

FIGURE 1
Proposition 1B: Uses of Bond Funds
Amount
(In Millions)

Congestion Reduction, Highway and Local Road Improvements

$11,250

Reduce congestion on state highways and major access routes

$4,500

Increase highways, roads, and transit capacity

2,000

Improve local roads

2,000

Enhance State Route 99 capacity, safety, and operations

1,000

Provide grants for locally funded transportation projects

1,000

Rehabilitate and improve operation of state highways and local roads

750

Public Transportation

$4,000

Improve local rail and transit services, including purchasing vehicles and right of way

$3,600

Improve intercity rail, including purchasing railcars and locomotives

400

Goods Movement and Air Quality

$3,200

Improve movement of goods on state highways and rail system, and in ports

$2,000

Reduce emissions from goods movement activities

1,000

Retrofit and replace school buses

200

Safety and Security

$1,475

Improve security and facilitate disaster response of transit systems

$1,000

Provide grants to improve railroad crossing safety

250

Provide grants to seismically retrofit local bridges and overpasses

125

Provide grants to improve security and disaster planning in publicly owned ports, harbors, and ferry facilities

100

Total

20 | Analysis

$19,925

HIGHWAY SAFETY, TRAFFIC REDUCTION, prop
AIR QUALITY, AND PORT SECURITY BOND ACT OF 2006.

1B

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

interest payments from the state’s General Fund
over a period of about 30 years. If the bonds
are sold at an average interest rate of 5 percent,
the cost would be about $38.9 billion to pay off
both the principal ($19.9 billion) and interest
($19.0 billion). The average repayment for
principal and interest would be about $1.3 billion
per year.

For text of Proposition 1B see page 114.

Operational Costs. The state and local
governments that construct or improve
transportation infrastructure with these bond funds
(by, for example, building roads and bridges or
purchasing buses or railcars) will incur unknown
additional costs to operate and maintain them. A
portion of these costs would be offset by revenues
generated by the improvements, such as transit
fares and tolls.

Analysis | 21

1B

Prop Highway safety, traffic reduction,

1B air quality, and port security bond act of 2006.
ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 1B

1B

YES ON PROPOSITION 1B: BUILD NEW ROADS
AND HIGHWAYS NOW
California has the most congested highways in the
nation—we spend 500,000 hours stuck in traffic every day.
It’s clear that the time to rebuild California’s roads, highways,
and transportation systems is now.
Proposition 1B puts backlogged transportation projects on
the fast track, reducing congestion and improving highway
safety.
While Prop. 1A protects the gas tax funds we already pay
at the pump, Prop. 1B is just as important because it provides
funding now to jump-start repairs of our aging highways and
to start building the transportation projects we know we’ll
need in the future.
YES ON 1B IMPROVES SAFETY, REDUCES
CONGESTION, AND EXPANDS PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
Proposition 1B will fund projects in every corner of the
state. Prop. 1B invests in:
• Making safety improvements to the most dangerous
highways and corridors
• Reducing congestion and travel delays
• Adding more lanes to congested highways
• Fixing local streets, roads, and intersections
• Building and expanding public transportation
• Making bridges seismically safe
• Expanding carpool lanes
• Providing matching funds for communities that have
approved local transportation measures
YES ON 1B WILL REDUCE AIR POLLUTION AND
IMPROVE AIR QUALITY
Prop. 1B includes funding to reduce air pollution by
replacing old polluting school buses, expanding mass transit,
and expanding carpool and HOV lanes. And, by reducing
congestion on our freeways and roads, Prop. 1B will also

help reduce car emissions—one of the leading sources of air
pollution.
YES ON 1B: STRICT ACCOUNTABILITY AND NO
NEW TAXES
• Prop. 1B includes important accountability measures like
annual audits and reports to ensure funds are spent on
intended projects.
• Prop. 1B lets us begin building roads now and pay for
them as we use them—with current tax revenues and
without raising taxes. It is like a mortgage on a house that
lets you live in your home while you pay for it.
YES ON 1B: PART OF A LONG-TERM PLAN TO
REBUILD CALIFORNIA
Proposition 1B is part of the Rebuild California Plan,
which uses the taxes we’re already paying to build the roads,
housing, schools, and water systems we need to sustain our
economy and our quality of life for the long term.
REBUILD CALIFORNIA: YES ON 1A, 1B, 1C, 1D,
and 1E
California’s population will reach 50 million in the next 20
years—twice what our current infrastructure was designed
for—and it can’t be rebuilt overnight. That’s why we’ve got
to start now.
To learn more about how this infrastructure plan will benefit
you and your community, visit www.ReadForYourself.org.
YES ON 1B: SAFER ROADS, LESS POLLUTION, AND
REDUCED TRAFFIC CONGESTION
MARIAN BERGESON, Chair
California Transportation Commission
ALAN C. LLOYD, Former Chair
California Air Resources Board
ALLAN ZAREMBERG, President
California Chamber of Commerce

REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 1B
We’ve all heard, “some things are too good to be true.”
The argument in support of Proposition 1B is clearly one of
those times.
Instead of envisioning a home mortgage being paid
for while you live in it, as the proponents would have you
imagine, envision instead drowning in a sea of credit card
debt. That’s where California is headed.
We all want better roads and less traffic congestion.
However, if the Legislature turned its attention to
streamlining construction projects and easing overburdensome regulations, we wouldn’t need to borrow billions
of dollars. Instead, we would use an annual portion of our
general fund tax dollars with limited borrowing to complete
these projects. This balanced approach would significantly
reduce our need to borrow billions of dollars.
What about accountability and audits?

22 | Arguments

When was the last time an audit of state government
spending showed that its programs were cost effective
and timely? Quite the opposite is true. A well
thought out plan for our transportation needs is the
only sensible way to improve California’s roadways.
A hastily developed bond, with “after the fact” oversight,
containing billions of dollars in borrowing is a recipe for
failure.
Make no mistake; a bond is not free money. You will pay
for the considerable borrowing with substantial interest. NO
on 1B will force the Legislature to develop a responsible
bond package by including “pay as you go,” environmental
permitting reform, design-build efficiencies, and other
common sense reforms.
MICHAEL N. VILLINES, California State Assemblyman
29th District

Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.

Highway safety, traffic reduction, Prop
air quality, and port security bond act of 2006.

1B

ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 1B
$32 billion. That is what our children and grandchildren
will pay to settle the debt associated with this bond. All this
for funding costly programs at the expense of desperately
needed highway construction.
Make no mistake: every Member of the Legislature who
voted against this bond measure supports restoring our
state’s crumbling transportation system. We support
dedicating every dollar you pay in gas taxes to our highways.
And, we support building for California’s future wisely.
However, this measure fails to achieve these important goals
in a fiscally responsible manner.
Improved transportation is a critical issue for our state, but
equally important is that each additional borrowed dollar we
spend worsens our budget deficit and could cause significant
consequences for hard-working California families.
A fiscally responsible solution would be a “pay as you go”
approach to funding much-needed transportation projects.
This approach will pay for infrastructure improvements from
the general fund (taxes you already pay) and allow California
to borrow less money to meet its annual obligations.
By setting aside a portion of the budget each year for
infrastructure, we will be able to better meet our state’s
complex needs and not saddle our children and grandchildren
with backbreaking debt.
Of further concern in this measure is the rush to spend
our tax dollars. In hastily passing this bond measure,
the Legislature failed to include time and cost saving
opportunities such as “Design-Build” and environmental
permitting reforms that would have streamlined the
construction process, completing more projects with the
same amount of money. Additionally, within 3 weeks after

voter approval of this measure, the California Transportation
Commission is required to “develop and adopt guidelines”
to fund all outlined transportation programs and spend
billions of your hard-earned tax dollars. Then CALTRANS
and your regional and county transportation agencies must
submit all potential transportation projects to the California
Transportation Commission. Just think: A state government
agency must put rules in place to spend billions of dollars in
just 3 weeks on projects across California without allowing
enough time for public oversight and review. Is this the best
way to spend your tax dollars?
Significant fiscal decisions in Government should not be
made without adequate time for due diligence and analysis.
Governor Schwarzenegger is right; California state
government has neglected the transportation needs of our
State for three decades and something needs to be done. But
let’s do this right. Let’s go back to the drawing board and
fi nd a responsible way to focus on critically needed projects
while at the same time developing a fi nancially accountable
plan that includes a “pay as you go” element, without any
wasteful spending to pay for these important projects.
We should demand that our children and grandchildren
have a transportation system that meets the needs of the
21st Century. That’s why you need to vote “no” on this
bond and force the Legislature to produce a transportation
infrastructure plan for our future that is responsible, realistic,
and result driven.
MICHAEL N. VILLINES, California State Assemblyman
29th District

REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 1B
Even the opponent agrees we have to start now to improve
our state’s crumbling transportation system, build new
roads, and relieve traffic congestion. That’s exactly what
Proposition 1B will do.
YES ON 1B will finally make our transportation system
a priority and provide funds we need to begin addressing the
backlog of projects throughout the state to reduce congestion,
improve air quality, expand mass transit, make road safety
improvements, and repair local streets and roads. The longer we
neglect our transportation system, the more costly and serious
the problems become. We can’t afford to wait any longer.
PROPOSITION 1B IS FISCALLY RESPONSIBLE
• 1B contains strict fiscal safeguards to protect taxpayers,
like annual audits and public reports to show how and
where funds are spent.
• By issuing bonds, Prop. 1B will provide immediate
funding to jump-start transportation projects and allow
us to pay for them over the next 20 years, with existing
state revenues and without raising taxes.

• Just like a mortgage on a home, Prop. 1B allows us to
improve our transportation system now and pay for it as
we use it over the long term.
• That’s why THE CALIFORNIA TAXPAYERS’
ASSOCIATION SUPPORTS 1B.
Yes on 1B is part of the Rebuild California Plan. Our
economic future and our quality of life depend on a reliable
transportation system that moves goods and people efficiently.
We’ve got to start now.
YES on 1B. Build new roads and highways, invest in
traffic safety, relieve congestion, and improve mass transit.
LARRY McCARTHY, President
California Taxpayers’ Association
THOMAS V. McKERNAN, President
Automobile Club of Southern California (AAA)
MICHAEL BROWN, Commissioner
California Highway Patrol

Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.

Arguments | 23

1B

PROPOSITION

1C

HOUSING AND EMERGENCY SHELTER
TRUST FUND ACT OF 2006.

Official Title and Summary

Prepared by the Attorney General

HOUSING AND EMERGENCY SHELTER TRUST FUND ACT OF 2006.

1C

• Funds may be used for the purpose of providing shelters for battered women and their children, clean
and safe housing for low-income senior citizens; homeownership assistance for the disabled, military
veterans, and working families; and repairs and accessibility improvements to apartment for families
and disabled citizens.
• The state shall issue bonds totaling two billion eight hundred fifty million dollars ($2,850,000,000)
paid from existing state funds at an average annual cost of two hundred and four million dollars
($204,000,000) per year over the 30 year life of the bonds.
• Requires reporting and publication of annual independent audited reports showing use of funds, and
limits administration and overhead costs.
• Appropriates money from the General Fund to pay off bonds.

Summary of Legislative Analyst’s Estimate of Net State and Local Government Fiscal Impact:
• State cost of about $6.1 billion over 30 years to pay off both the principal ($2.85 billion) and interest
costs ($3.3 billion) on the bonds. Payments of about $204 million per year.

FINAL VOTES CAST BY THE LEGISLATURE ON SB 1689 (PROPOSITION 1C)
Senate:

Ayes 27

Noes 11

Assembly:

Ayes 54

Noes 16

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst

BACKGROUND
About 200,000 houses and apartments are built
in California each year. Most of these housing units
are built entirely with private dollars. Some units,
however, receive subsidies from federal, state, and
local governments. For instance, the state provides
low-interest loans or grants to developers (private,
nonprofit, and governmental) to subsidize housing
construction costs. Typically, the housing must be
sold or rented to Californians with low incomes.
Other state programs provide homebuyers with
direct financial assistance to help with the costs of
a downpayment.

24 | Title and Summary/Analysis

While the state provides financial assistance
through these programs, cities and counties are
responsible for the zoning and approval of new
housing. In addition, cities, counties, and other
local governments are responsible for providing
infrastructure-related services to new housing—
such as water, sewer, roads, and parks.
In 2002, voters approved Proposition 46, which
provided a total of $2.1 billion of general obligation
bonds to fund state housing programs. We estimate
that about $350 million of the Proposition 46 funds
will be unspent as of November 1, 2006.

HOUSING AND EMERGENCY SHELTER prop
TRUST FUND ACT OF 2006.

1C

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

PROPOSAL
This measure authorizes the state to sell $2.85
billion of general obligation bonds to fund 13 new
and existing housing and development programs.
(See “An Overview of State Bond Debt” on page 96
for basic information on state general obligation
bonds.) Figure 1 (see next page) describes the
programs and the amount of funding that each
would receive under the measure. About one-half
of the funds would go to existing state housing
programs. The development programs, however,
are new—with details to be established by the
Legislature. The major allocations of the bond
proceeds are as follows:
• Development Programs ($1.35 Billion). The
measure would fund three new programs aimed at
increasing development. Most of the funds would
be targeted for development projects in existing
urban areas and near public transportation. The
programs would provide loans and grants for a
wide variety of projects, such as parks, water,
sewage, transportation, and housing.
• Homeownership Programs ($625 Million). A
number of the programs funded by this measure
would encourage homeownership for low- and
moderate-income homebuyers. The funds would
be used to provide downpayment assistance
to homebuyers through low-interest loans or
grants. Typically, eligibility for this assistance
would be based on the household’s income, the
cost of the home being purchased, and whether
it is the household’s first home purchase.
• Multifamily Housing Programs ($590 Million).
The measure also would fund programs aimed at
the construction or renovation of rental housing
projects, such as apartment buildings. These
programs generally provide local governments,
nonprofit organizations, and private developers
with low-interest (3 percent) loans to fund part
of the construction cost. In exchange, a project
For text of Proposition 1C see page 118.

must reserve a portion of its units for lowincome households for a period of 55 years.
This measure gives funding priority to projects
in already developed areas and near existing
public services (such as public transportation).
• Other Housing Programs ($285 Million).
These funds would be used to provide loans and
grants to the developers of homeless shelters
and housing for farmworkers. In addition, funds
would be allocated to pilot projects aimed at
reducing the costs of affordable housing.
The funds would be allocated over a number
of years. The measure provides the Legislature
broad authority to make future changes to these
programs to ensure their effectiveness.

FISCAL EFFECT
Bond Costs. The cost to pay off these bonds
would depend primarily on the following two
factors:
• Payment Period. The state would likely make
principal and interest payments on the bonds
from the state’s General Fund over a period of
about 30 years.
• Interest Rate. Usually, the interest on bonds
issued is exempt from both state and federal
taxes because the bonds are for public purposes.
This results in lower debt service payments
for the state. Some programs proposed by
this measure, however, would not be eligible
for the federal tax exemption—resulting in a
higher interest rate. This is because the housing
programs provide funds for private purposes.
(We estimate this would be the case for about
60 percent of the bonds.)
If the federally taxable bonds were sold at an
average rate of 6.5 percent and the remaining
bonds at an average rate of 5 percent, the cost to
the state would be about $6.1 billion to pay off
both the principal ($2.85 billion) and the interest
Analysis | 25

1C

prop HOUSING AND EMERGENCY SHELTER

1C TRUST FUND ACT OF 2006.
Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)
FIGURE 1
Proposition 1C: Uses of Bond Funds
Amount

1C

(In Millions)

Development Programs
Development in
urban areasa

Grants for various projects—including parks, water, sewer, transportation,
and environmental cleanup—to facilitate urban “infill” development.

$850

Development near
public transportationa

Grants and loans to local governments and developers to encourage more
dense development near public transportation.

300

Parksa

Grant funding for parks throughout the state.

200
$1,350

Homeownership Programs
Low-income households

Variety of homeownership programs for low-income households.

$290

Downpayment assistance

Deferred low-interest loans up to 6 percent of home purchase
price for first-time low- or moderate-income homebuyers.

200

Local governments

Grants to local governments which reduce barriers to affordable housing.
Funds would be used for homebuyer assistance.

125

Self-help construction

Grants to organizations which assist low- or moderate-income households
in building or renovating their own homes.

10

$625
Multifamily Housing Programs
Multifamily housing

Low-interest loans for housing developments for low-income renters.

$345

Supportive housing

Low-interest loans for housing projects which also provide health and
social services to low-income renters.

195

Homeless youth

Low-interest loans for housing projects which provide housing for
homeless young people.

50

$590
Other Housing Programs
Farmworker housing

Low-interest loans and grants for developing housing for farmworkers.

$135

Pilot programs

Grants and loans for pilot projects to develop housing at reduced costs.

100

Homeless shelters

Grants for developing homeless shelters.

50

a

$285
Total
a

New program.

26 | Analysis

$2,850

HOUSING AND EMERGENCY SHELTER prop
TRUST FUND ACT OF 2006.

1C

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

($3.3 billion). The average payment would be about
$204 million each year.
Administrative Costs. The Department of
Housing and Community Development and
the California Housing Finance Agency would
experience increased costs to administer the

For text of Proposition 1C see page 118.

various housing and urban development programs.
A portion of the programs’ allocations—probably
between $100 million and $150 million of the
total bond funds—would be used to pay these
administrative costs over time.

Analysis | 27

1C

Prop HOUSING AND EMERGENCY SHELTER

1C TRUST FUND ACT OF 2006.
ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 1C

1C

YES on Proposition 1C will provide emergency shelters for
battered women, affordable homes for seniors and low-income
families, and shelters with social services for homeless
families with kids. That is why Habitat for Humanity, AARP,
and California Partnership to End Domestic Violence strongly
urge you to vote YES on Proposition 1C.
Importantly, this measure will be funded out of existing state
resources without raising taxes.
Many of our communities face severe problems of housing
affordability, homelessness, and domestic violence. Over
360,000 Californians are homeless every night.
Last year, 5,108 women and children were turned away from
domestic violence shelters because they were full. Housing
affordability for working families in California is at historic
lows.
Safe shelter is fundamental to a decent life. YES on
Proposition 1C will:
• Expand the number of shelter beds for battered women and
homeless families with children.
• Provide housing for homeless foster youths.
• Make security improvements and repairs to existing shelters.
• Provide clean and safe homes for senior citizens and lowincome families.
Additionally, Proposition 1C helps working families afford
homes and provides accessibility improvements to apartments
for disabled Californians.
Proposition 1C also creates 87,000 jobs and helps improve
the state’s economy.
Allows Seniors to Live Independently: This measure allows
seniors to live at home without the fear of being institutionalized
in a nursing home.
Helps Battered Women: “Most cities in California don’t
have adequate shelters for women and children who have
been beaten and abused. Proposition 1C begins to fix this
bad situation.” —California State Sheriffs Association

Independent Audits and Accountability:
“This measure requires independent audits, limits
administrative expenses, and contains strict accountability
provisions to ensure the funds are used as promised.”
—California Chamber of Commerce
Helps Foster Youth: “Tragically, 65% of foster youth are
homeless on the day they leave foster care. Proposition 1C will
help them find stable homes.” —Homes 4 California
Critical Need for Housing and Emergency Shelters:
“Proposition 1C provides shelter for those who need help the
most—battered women, homeless families with children, and
disabled seniors.” —Habitat for Humanity, Sacramento
Yes on 1C: Part of a Long-Term Plan to Rebuild
California
Proposition 1C is part of the Rebuild California Plan, which
uses the taxes we’re already paying to build the roads, housing,
schools, and water systems we need to sustain our economy and
our quality of life for the long term. Please support the longterm plan to rebuild California by voting Yes on 1A, 1B, 1C, 1D,
and 1E.
To learn more about how this plan will benefit you and your
community, visit www.ReadForYourself.org.
Proposition 1C provides shelters for our most vulnerable
Californians: the elderly, disabled, homeless families, battered
women and children. Please vote Yes on 1C for emergency
shelter and housing relief without raising taxes.
CHERYL KEENAN, Executive Director
San Diego Habitat for Humanity
MARIVIC MABANAG, Executive Director
California Partnership to End Domestic Violence
TOM PORTER, State Director
AARP

REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 1C
Proposition 1C is fiscally irresponsible. 1C grows bureaucracy
with almost $3 billion in borrowed money, burdening everyone
with debt to benefit a small number of people selected by
government, including financially eligible illegal immigrants.
In their “yes” argument, 1C’s backers claim the bond would
be “funded out of existing state resources without raising taxes.”
Sadly, there is no such thing as free money.
When California sells bonds, what is really happening is that
the state is going into debt in your name. This debt gets repaid
at about two dollars of principal and interest for every dollar
borrowed.
Debt repayment has the top priority in government
spending. So, money spent to repay bonds means budget cuts
for education, roads, Medi-Cal, levee repair, prisons, and
water projects. Or, even less money for tax cuts.
More debt = less money for priorities. And, less money for
priorities = pressure to raise taxes on all Californians.
Debt should be used sparingly to build long lasting projects
such as roads, bridges, dams, schools, and universities.
28 | Arguments

Builders build homes, not government. Fees, regulations,
and government interference make homes unaffordable in
California. Freeing builders to build is the best affordable
housing program—and, it costs nothing!
Adding more debt to our state’s credit card hurts ALL
Californians. Proposition 1C would add $600 of debt and
interest payment obligations on every California family of
four. That’s $600 that could be returned to the people in
lower taxes, or spent on roads and schools.
Be responsible: vote “no.”
ASSEMBLYMAN CHUCK DEVORE, Member
Assembly Budget Committee
BILL LEONARD, Member
California State Board of Equalization
MIKE SPENCE, President
California Taxpayer Protection Committee

Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.

HOUSING AND EMERGENCY SHELTER Prop
TRUST FUND ACT OF 2006.

1C

ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 1C
Proposition 1C would add almost $3 billion in new
government debt and expand bureaucracy, but it won’t make
housing affordable in California.
Sacramento politicians placed Proposition 1C on the ballot
at 3 in the morning. Why did they vote in the middle of the
night with little debate and no oversight? What were they
trying to hide?
Proposition 1C won’t make housing more affordable for
the average Californian. What it will do is grow government
and force the average California family of four to pay over
$600 in debt and interest while INCREASING PRESSURE
TO RAISE TAXES.
What will $2.85 billion of new government borrowing
buy? In a state of 37 million people with over 12.2 million
housing units, not even a drop in the bucket. Instead,
Proposition 1C will empower bureaucrats to dispense cash
to a select few who meet the government rules and are lucky
enough to be chosen to get the money borrowed in your
name.
It’s true that only 14 percent of families in California
can now afford the median-priced home. But, government
itself is to blame for this problem. More than half the cost
of a home or apartment rent in California is due to high
taxes, overregulation, environmental lawsuits, fees, and
government interference in the free market—all of which
doubles the high cost of housing.
So, what do the politicians propose? Their solution:
another government program that allows affordable housing

only for the lucky few who can get their hands on your
money.
The true way to make housing affordable again in
California is to allow builders to build homes and
condominiums and apartments and then allow people to pay
to live in them—without the government telling everyone
what to do and how to do it.
Instead, the text of Proposition 1C reads like the failed
government housing programs of the past, with references
to, “target population,” “Housing Finance Committee,”
“supportive housing,” “operating subsidies,” and “pilot
programs.” Along with millions of dollars for bureaucracy
and even $400 million for parks that house no one at all!
One last reason to vote “no” on Proposition 1C: we can’t
afford more debt. For every dollar we borrow, we and our
children will have to repay that dollar plus a dollar in interest
costs. That means the average California family will have to
pay more than $600 in additional taxes over the life of this
bond, half of which will be to pay the roughly $3 billion in
interest fees alone.
Vote “no” on Proposition 1C. We can’t afford it, and it
won’t make housing more affordable in California.
For more information, please visit Assemblyman Chuck
DeVore’s website at: www.NoProp1C.com or email him at
NoProp1C@aol.com.
ASSEMBLYMAN CHUCK DEVORE, Member
California State Assembly

REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 1C
Yes on Proposition 1C makes shelters and homes available
to battered women, seniors, homeless children, low-income
families, and former foster youths. It won’t solve all of these
problems overnight, but it is an important step forward.
Proposition 1C will not raise taxes. The measure will be
paid for out of existing state resources. Just as important,
Proposition 1C requires independent audits to protect
taxpayers and ensure shelters and homes are built as
promised.
This measure is the result of years of planning by experts
in the problems of homelessness and domestic violence, as
well as the housing crisis facing the elderly, families with
children, people with mental illness, and veterans.
That is why leading California organizations have
endorsed Proposition 1C, including:
Habitat for Humanity, San Diego, Greater Los Angeles,
and Sacramento
AARP
Congress of California Seniors
California Partnership to End Domestic Violence
California Chamber of Commerce

Orange County Business Council
League of Women Voters
Foster Youth Alliance
Vietnam Veterans of California
Proposition 1C is a fiscally responsible part of the Rebuild
California Plan, a long-term plan to build the roads, housing,
schools, and flood-control systems we need for California’s
future.
Yes on Proposition 1C addresses problems we can’t afford
to ignore. It will provide clean and safe accommodations for
seniors, shelters for homeless families, and secure homes for
battered women. Please help California take a positive step
forward by voting Yes on Proposition 1C.
HANK LACAYO, President
Congress of California Seniors
PETER CAMERON, President
Vietnam Veterans of California
MARIVIC MABANAG, Executive Director
California Partnership to End Domestic Violence

Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.

Arguments | 29

1C

PROPOSITION

1D

Kindergarten–University Public Education
Facilities Bond Act of 2006.

Official Title and Summary

Prepared by the Attorney General

KINDERGARTEN–UNIVERSITY
PUBLIC EDUCATION FACILITIES BOND ACT OF 2006.

1D

• This ten billion four hundred sixteen million dollar ($10,416,000,000) bond issue will provide needed
funding to relieve public school overcrowding and to repair older schools.
• It will improve earthquake safety and fund vocational educational facilities in public schools. Bond
funds must be spent according to strict accountability measures.
• Funds will also be used to repair and upgrade existing public college and university buildings and to
build new classrooms to accommodate the growing student enrollment in the California Community
Colleges, the University of California, and the California State University.
• Appropriates money from the General Fund to pay off bonds.

Summary of Legislative Analyst’s Estimate of Net State and Local Government Fiscal Impact:
• State costs of about $20.3 billion to pay off both the principal ($10.4 billion) and interest ($9.9 billion)
on the bonds. Payments of about $680 million per year.

FINAL VOTES CAST BY THE LEGISLATURE ON AB 127 (PROPOSITION 1D)
Senate:

Ayes 29

Noes 8

Assembly:

Ayes 58

Noes 12

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst

BACKGROUND
Public education in California consists of
two systems. One system includes about 1,000
local school districts that provide education from
kindergarten through grade 12 (“K–12”) to about
6.3 million students. The other system (commonly
referred to as “higher education”) includes the
California Community Colleges (CCC), the
California State University (CSU), and the
University of California (UC). These three higher
education segments provide education beyond
grade 12 to a total of about 2.1 million students.

K–12 School Facilities
Through the School Facility Program (SFP),
K–12 school districts apply for funding to buy
land, construct new buildings, and modernize (that
30 | Title and Summary/Analysis

is, renovate) existing buildings. A school district’s
allocation is based on a formula. The formula
considers the number of students a district expects
to enroll that cannot be served in existing facility
space. The SFP requires the state and school districts
to share the cost of facilities. For new construction
projects, the cost is shared equally by the state and
school districts. For modernization projects, the
state pays 60 percent and school districts pay 40
percent of the cost. If a school district faces unusual
circumstances, however, it may apply for “hardship”
funding from the state to offset its local share of
costs.
Major Funding Sources. As described below,
funding for school facilities comes mostly from
state and local general obligation bonds. (See “An
Overview of State Bond Debt” on page 96 for more
information on these bonds.)

Kindergarten–University Public Education prop
Facilities Bond Act of 2006.

1D

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

• State General Obligation Bonds. The state has
funded the SFP by issuing general obligation
bonds. Over the past decade, voters have
approved a total of $28.1 billion in state bonds
for K–12 school facilities. Approximately $3
billion of these funds remain available for new
construction projects.
• Local General Obligation Bonds. At the local
level, school districts typically meet most of their
matching requirement and other construction
needs by issuing local general obligation bonds.
These local bonds can be authorized with the
approval of 55 percent of the voters in the district.
The bonds are repaid using local property tax
revenue. Over the past ten years, school districts
have received voter approval to issue more than
$41 billion in local facility bonds.
Although school facilities currently are funded
mostly from state and local general obligation
bonds, school districts also receive funds from:
• Developer Fees. State law allows school districts
to impose developer fees on new construction.
These fees are levied on new residential,
commercial, and industrial developments.
Although they contribute a moderate amount
statewide compared to general obligation bond
proceeds, developer fees vary significantly by
community depending on the amount of local
development. In fast-growing areas, they can
make notable contributions to K–12 school
construction.
• Special Local Bonds (Known as “Mello-Roos”
Bonds). School districts also may form special
districts to sell bonds for school construction
projects. (A special district generally does not
encompass the entire school district.) The bonds,
which require two-thirds voter approval, are
paid off by property owners located within the
special district. Over the past decade, MelloRoos bonds have provided school districts with
a total of $3.7 billion in facility funding.
For text of Proposition 1D see page 120.

Higher Education Facilities
California’s system of public higher education
includes 142 campuses in the three segments listed
below:
• The CCCs provide instruction to about 1.5
million students at 109 campuses operated by 72
locally governed districts throughout the state.
The community colleges grant associate degrees,
offer a variety of technical career courses, and
provide general education coursework that is
transferable to four-year universities.
• The CSU has 23 campuses, with an enrollment
of about 420,000 students. The system grants
bachelor degrees, master degrees, and a small
number of specified doctoral degrees.
• The UC has nine general campuses, one
health sciences campus, and various affiliated
institutions, with total enrollment of about
210,000 students. This system offers bachelor,
master, and doctoral degrees, and is the primary
state-supported agency for conducting research.
Over the past decade, the voters have approved
$6.5 billion in state general obligation bonds for
capital improvements at public higher education
campuses. Virtually all of these funds have been
committed to specific projects. The state also
has provided about $1.6 billion in lease-revenue
bonds (authorized by the Legislature) for this same
purpose.
In addition to these state bonds, the higher
education segments have three other sources of
funding for capital projects.
• Local General Obligation Bonds. Like K–12
school districts, community college districts are
authorized to sell general obligation bonds to
finance construction projects with the approval
of 55 percent of the voters in the district. Over
the past decade, community college districts
have received voter approval to issue more than
$15 billion in local facility bonds.
Analysis | 31

1D

prop Kindergarten–University Public Education

1D Facilities Bond Act of 2006.
Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

1D

FIGURE 1

• Gifts and Grants. In recent years, CSU and UC
together have received more than $100 million
annually in gifts and grants for construction of
facilities.
• UC Research Revenue. The UC finances the
construction of some new research facilities
by selling bonds and pledging future research
revenue for their repayment. Currently, UC uses
about $130 million a year of research revenue to
pay off these bonds.

Proposition 1D: Uses of Bond Funds
Amount
(In Millions)

K–12

This measure allows the state to sell $10.4
billion of general obligation bonds for K–12
school facilities ($7.3 billion) and higher education
facilities ($3.1 billion).

K–12 School Facilities

32 | Analysis

New construction projects

1,900a,b
1,000

Charter schools facilities

500

Career technical facilities

500

Environment-friendly projects

100

Joint-use projects

29

Subtotal, K–12

As shown in Figure 1, the $7.3 billion for
K–12 school facilities is designated for seven
types of projects. The underlying requirements and
funding formulas for four of these project types
(modernization, new construction, charter school
facilities, and joint-use projects) would be based on
the existing SFP. The other three types of projects
(overcrowded schools, career technical facilities,
and environment-friendly projects) would be new
components of the SFP.

New Construction ($1.9 Billion). These monies
would cover various costs associated with building
new facilities, including site acquisition, project
design, engineering, construction, and inspection.
Up to $200 million of the $1.9 billion would be

$3,300a

Severely overcrowded schools

PROPOSAL

Modernization ($3.3 Billion). These monies
would be for the modernization of existing school
facilities. School districts would be required to pay
40 percent of project costs (unless they qualify for
state hardship funding).

Modernization projects

($7,329)

Higher Education

a

Community Colleges

$1,507

University of California

890c

California State University

690

Subtotal, Higher Education

($3,087)

Total

$10,416

A total of up to $200 million is available from these two amounts combined
as incentive funding to promote the creation of small high schools.

b

Up to $200 million is available for earthquake-related retrofitting.

c

$200 million is available for medical education programs.

available to retrofit facilities likely to be unsafe
during an earthquake. Districts would be required
to pay 50 percent of new construction and
earthquake-safety projects (unless they qualify for
state hardship funding).

Kindergarten–University Public Education prop
Facilities Bond Act of 2006.

1D

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

Relief Grants for Overcrowded Schools
($1 Billion). As a condition of receiving one of
these grants, school districts would be required to
replace portable classrooms with newly constructed
permanent classrooms, remove portable classrooms
from overcrowded school sites, and reduce the total
number of portable classrooms within the district.
As with other new construction projects, districts
would be required to pay 50 percent of project
costs. Under the program definition of overcrowded,
roughly 1,800 schools (or 20 percent of all schools)
would be eligible for funding.
Career Technical Education Facilities ($500
Million). The measure also funds a new facility
program designed to enhance educational
opportunities for students interested in technical
careers. Grants would be provided to high schools
and local agencies that have career technical
programs. The grants would be allocated on a per
square foot basis, with a maximum of $3 million
for each new construction project and $1.5 million
for each modernization project. For both types of
grants, the required local contribution would be
50 percent of project costs. Given the program’s
requirements, approximately 500 school districts
(or one-half of all districts) would be eligible for
new construction and modernization grants. In
addition, about 25 local agencies would be eligible
for modernization grants.
Charter School Facilities ($500 Million).
These monies would be for new construction and
modernization of charter school facilities. (Charter
schools are public schools that are exempt from
certain state requirements in exchange for adhering
to a local- or state-approved charter.) A 50 percent
local contribution would be required.
Environment-Friendly Projects ($100 Million).
These monies would be provided as special incentive
grants to promote certain types of environmentfriendly facilities. For example, districts could
For text of Proposition 1D see page 120.

receive grant funding if their facilities included
designs and materials that promoted the efficient
use of energy and water, the maximum use of natural
lighting, the use of recycled materials, or the use
of acoustics conducive to teaching and learning.
The same local contributions would be required
as for other new construction and modernization
projects.
Joint-Use Projects ($29 Million). These monies
would be available for both constructing new facilities
and reconfiguring existing facilities for a joint-use
purpose. Joint-use projects include gymnasiums,
libraries, child care facilities, and teacher preparation
facilities that are located at a school but used for
joint school/community or K–12/higher education
purposes. Under such arrangements, the school
district and joint-use partner share the 50 percent
local matching requirement.

Higher Education Facilities
The measure includes $3.1 billion to construct new
buildings and related infrastructure, alter existing
buildings, and purchase equipment for use in these
buildings for the state higher education segments. As
Figure 1 shows, the measure allocates $1.5 billion
to CCC, $890 million to UC, and $690 million to
CSU. The Governor and Legislature would select the
specific projects to be funded by the bond monies.

FISCAL EFFECTS
The costs of these bonds would depend on interest
rates in effect at the time they are sold and the time
period over which they are repaid. The state would
likely make principal and interest payments from
the state’s General Fund over a period of about 30
years. If the bonds were sold at an average interest
rate of 5 percent, the cost would be about $20.3
billion to pay off both principal ($10.4 billion) and
interest ($9.9 billion). The average payment would
be about $680 million per year.
Analysis | 33

1D

Prop KINDERGARTEN-UNIVERSITY

1D PUBLIC EDUCATION FACILITIES BOND ACT OF 2006.
ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 1D

1D

VOTE YES ON 1D: WE NEED TO INVEST IN OUR
CHILDREN’S EDUCATION BECAUSE PROVIDING A
QUALITY EDUCATION IS THE BEST THING WE CAN
DO TO INVEST IN THEIR FUTURE
1D provides the funding to make our schools earthquake
safe, reduce overcrowding, update our schools for the latest
technology, build new facilities for vocational education,
and build college labs that make the discoveries which fuel
California’s economy.
VOTE YES ON 1D: MAKE OUR SCHOOLS
EARTHQUAKE SAFE
Our children’s safety should be our top priority! The State
Architect has determined that over 7,000 school buildings
and many others on college campuses need structural
upgrades to be earthquake safe.
VOTE YES ON 1D: REDUCE OVERCROWDING IN
OUR SCHOOLS
Over a million students are trying to learn in schools with
at least 75% more students than they were designed for. 1D
will begin building enough schools so that our children can
receive the quality education they deserve.
PROP. 1D INVESTS IN:
• Construction of approximately 6,500 new K–12
classrooms and 3,000 community college classrooms
• Repairing 31,000 classrooms
• Building science, engineering labs, and classrooms
• Providing 3,000 vocational education facilities
Visit ReadForYourself.org for a list of 1D projects.
1D IS SUPPORTED BY BOTH GOVERNOR
SCHWARZENEGGER
AND
BY
DEMOCRATIC
CANDIDATE FOR GOVERNOR PHIL ANGELIDES.
Leaders of both parties along with education and civic
organizations all agree investing in our kids’ education is the
most important thing we can do to invest in their future.
VOTE YES ON 1D: NEW FACILITIES FOR
VOCATIONAL AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION

Many students need vocational training instead of college,
but our schools do not have up-to-date facilities to provide
it. 1D will enable schools to provide the career and technical
training many students need to get jobs.
VOTE YES ON 1D: STRICT ACCOUNTABILITY
PROVISIONS
Every dollar must be strictly accounted for on a projectby-project basis with independent state and local audits.
Misuse of funds is a crime, punishable by imprisonment.
VOTE YES ON 1D: FOR OUR ECONOMIC FUTURE
California’s future cannot wait. The best way to grow
our economy and create good paying jobs is to make sure
our schools, community colleges, and universities have the
facilities to train our kids. 1D provides necessary funding
to build the community college and university labs and
facilities they need.
Parents, teachers, and California’s leaders agree that we
need 1D to provide a quality public education, to make our
schoolchildren safer in the event of an earthquake, and to
allow community colleges and universities to improve their
facilities.
YES ON 1D: PART OF A LONG-TERM PLAN TO
REBUILD CALIFORNIA
Proposition 1D is part of the Rebuild California Plan,
which uses the taxes we’re already paying to build the roads,
housing, schools, and water systems we need to sustain our
economy and our quality of life for the long term.
THE REBUILD CALIFORNIA PLAN: YES ON 1A, 1B,
1C, 1D, AND 1E
BARBARA E. KERR, President
California Teachers Association
GEORGE T. CAPLAN, President
California Community College Board of Governors
PAMELA T. JOHNSON, Chair
Coalition for Adequate School Housing

REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 1D
Please don’t be fooled into voting for this bond because
your local school needs help. Most schools got nothing from
the last statewide bond, and they will get nothing from this
one! This bond requires 50% matching funds from local
districts. Unless you live in a wealthy district with surplus
cash to supply the matching funds, your schools will never
see a penny from this bond—but you will be required to pay
higher taxes for the next 30 years! Is this fair?
California is facing the most severe fi nancial crisis
in its history. Our credit rating is the worst in the nation.
The Legislature has squandered the opportunity to build
new schools with the astounding 23 percent growth in tax
revenues over the past three years.
The results of this fi nancial mismanagement are
staggering. For decades, we will be forced to pay higher
taxes just to pay back current debt. Today’s schoolchildren

34 | Arguments

will still be paying for this bond long after their own
children have graduated!
At a time when the Governor and the Legislature are
struggling to repay the $100,388,000,000 in previouslyapproved debt, this $10,416,000,000 bond would dig us
much deeper into a fi nancial hole. Taxpayers will be forced
to pay back more than twice the amount borrowed, due to
compound interest and the cost of lawyers, Wall Street bond
traders, and state bureaucrats.
Please VOTE NO on Proposition 1D. Tell Sacramento
politicians to make school construction a top priority for
existing tax revenues.
THOMAS N. HUDSON, Executive Director
California Taxpayer Protection Committee

Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.

KINDERGARTEN-UNIVERSITY Prop
PUBLIC EDUCATION FACILITIES BOND ACT OF 2006.

1D

ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 1D
We Don’t Need More Education Spending Now
Proposition 1D is too big. Rather than limiting this bond
measure to the essential needs of building new schools and
rehabilitating older ones, this bond funds a variety of new,
untested programs such as Career and Technical Education
facilities, Overcrowding Relief Grants, seismic safety
upgrades, energy efficiency incentives, small learning
communities, and a medical education expansion with
some new “telemedicine” program. We need to stick to the
essentials and drop the fluff.
Proposition
1D
is
short-sighted.
Governor
Schwarzenegger’s 10-year infrastructure plan gave the state
a perfect opportunity to do some long-term planning. But
what happened? We get another short-term bond proposal.
Proposition 1D is only designed to fund the next two years of
need. Even though many school districts are facing declining
enrollment today, by the end of the decade enrollment in
schools all over the state will begin growing again. How are
schools supposed to plan if all they get are a series of shortterm fixes?

Proposition 1D is more borrowing. Why do we have to
incur more debt to build and modernize schools? We can
expand year-round school and better utilize our existing
school facilities. Why can’t we fund school construction on a
pay-as-you-go basis?
Proposition 1D is too costly. It is a $10.4 billion education
bond. The interest costs will push the total cost of the bond
well above $10.4 billion. Can we really afford this?
While education is important, it is not the only priority we
need to worry about. We need to deal with other problems
including holding down California’s debt and borrowing.
And, there are more important things to spend money on
than new vocational education facilities, energy efficiency,
and seismic safety upgrades. It’s about time we said No to
more and more education spending.
Vote NO on Proposition 1D.
WILLIAM SARACINO, Member
Editorial Board, California Political Review

REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 1D
VOTE YES ON 1D. HOW CAN WE AFFORD NOT TO
INVEST IN OUR SCHOOLS?
Few things are more important for our children and our
economy than to invest in education.
1D is the right solution to make our schools earthquake
safe and build more classrooms to relieve overcrowding for
our children. It will also help our state economy grow. It
doesn’t bite off more than we can afford to do right now, and
it allows planning for the future that is vitally important.
1D will provide real results for our kids.
Our community colleges also give a rapidly growing
student population the skills they need to succeed in the
workforce. We cannot afford to shortchange them—
California’s future depends on their success.
That’s why 1D has gained the support from parents,
teachers, seniors, business and taxpayer groups, and a
bipartisan group of the Legislature.
The California Taxpayers’ Association says, “Proposition
1D is a fiscally responsible way to finance school repair and
construction.”

Prop. 1D invests in:
• Construction of approximately 6,500 new K–12
classrooms and 3,000 community college classrooms
• Repair of 31,000 classrooms
• Building science, engineering labs, and classrooms
• Providing 3,000 vocational education facilities
Vote Yes on 1D. Invest in our children’s future by
investing in our schools today. A bright, highly skilled
student population makes California a stronger, better place
to live for all of us.
BRENDA DAVIS, President
California State PTA
LARRY McCARTHY, President
California Taxpayers’ Association
WILLIAM HAUCK, President
California Business Roundtable

Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.

Arguments | 35

1D

PROPOSITION

1E

DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND FLOOD PREVENTION
BOND ACT OF 2006.

Official Title and Summary

Prepared by the Attorney General

DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND FLOOD PREVENTION BOND ACT OF 2006.
• This act rebuilds and repairs California’s most vulnerable flood control structures to protect homes
and prevent loss of life from flood-related disasters, including levee failures, flash floods, and
mudslides.
• Protects California’s drinking water supply system by rebuilding delta levees that are vulnerable to
earthquakes and storms.
• Authorizes a $4.09 billion dollar bond act.
• Appropriates money from the General Fund to pay off bonds.

1E

Summary of Legislative Analyst’s Estimate of Net State and Local Government Fiscal Impact:
• State cost of about $8 billion over 30 years to pay off both the principal ($4.1 billion) and interest
($3.9 billion) costs on the bonds. Payments of about $266 million per year.
• Reduction in local property tax revenues of potentially up to several million dollars annually.
• Additional unknown state and local government costs to operate or maintain properties or projects
acquired or developed with these bond funds.

FINAL VOTES CAST BY THE LEGISLATURE ON AB 140 (PROPOSITION 1E)
Senate:

Ayes 36

Noes 1

Assembly:

Ayes 62

Noes 9

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst

BACKGROUND
State Role. Multiple agencies at each level of
government (state, federal, and local) have some
responsibilities for flood management. In addition,
private entities own and operate some flood control
facilities. The state carries out a number of programs
designed to provide flood management. Some of
these programs are operated directly by the state,
while others provide grants to local agencies for
similar purposes.
The state is primarily responsible for flood
control in the Central Valley. As shown in Figure
1, the state Central Valley flood control system
includes about 1,600 miles of levees, as well as
36 | Title and Summary/Analysis

other flood control infrastructure such as overflow
weirs and channels. The state directly funds the
construction and repair of flood management
structures such as levees, typically with a federal
and local cost share. For approximately 80 percent
of the levees in the Central Valley flood control
system, the state has turned over the operations and
maintenance to local governments (primarily local
flood control districts), although the state retains
ultimate responsibility for these levees and the
system as a whole.
Outside the Central Valley system, the state’s
role in flood management generally consists of
providing financial assistance to local governments

DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND FLOOD PREVENTION prop
BOND ACT OF 2006.

1E

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

for flood control projects located throughout the
state. For example, the state has provided funding
for the Santa Ana River Mainstem flood control
project that spans Orange, Riverside, and San
Bernardino Counties. In the Sacramento-San
Joaquin River Delta region (Delta), as another
example, the state has no oversight role with
respect to local levee construction or maintenance
(a majority of Delta levees—about 700 miles—
are located outside the state system). Because
a significant portion of the state’s population
depends on water supplies that come through the
Delta, there is a state interest in the continued
operation of the Delta levee system. Given this,
the state has provided financial assistance over
many years to local flood control districts in the
Delta region to rehabilitate and maintain levees.

FIGURE 1
Central Valley Flood Control System

1E

Funding. In general, state flood management
programs have been funded from the General
Fund, with some use of bond funds. Since 1996,
the voters have authorized a number of state
general obligation bonds, of which about $400
million has been allocated specifically for flood
management purposes. Most of these bond funds
for flood management have already been spent.
State funding levels for flood management
have varied substantially on a year-to-year
basis, largely depending on the availability of
General Fund and bond monies for this purpose.
For example, since 2000–01, annual state
funding for flood management has varied from
a low of about $60 million (2002–03) to a high
of about $270 million (2000–01). In addition
to state flood management programs, local
governments, including flood control districts
and other public water agencies, operate their
own flood management programs and projects.
Funding for these local programs comes from
various sources, including property assessments
For text of Proposition 1E see page 125.

and, in some cases, financial assistance from the
state.
A law passed earlier this year provides $500
million from the General Fund for emergency
levee repairs and other flood management-related
costs.
The Department of Water Resources (DWR)
has made rough estimates of the cost to repair and
upgrade the Central Valley flood control system
and levees in the Delta of between $7 billion and
$12 billion.
Analysis | 37

prop DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND FLOOD PREVENTION

1E BOND ACT OF 2006.
Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

1E

PROPOSAL

FIGURE 2

This measure authorizes the state to sell about
$4.1 billion in general obligation bonds for various
flood management programs. (See “An Overview of
State Bond Debt” on page 96 for basic information
on state general obligation bonds.) Figure 2
summarizes the purposes for which the bond
money would be available to be spent by DWR and
for grants to local agencies. In order to spend these
bond funds, the measure requires the Legislature
to appropriate them in the annual budget act or
another law.

Proposition 1E: Uses of Bond Funds

Flood control subventions
(local projects outside the Central Valley).

500

Specifically, the bond includes about $4.1 billion
for various flood management activities, allocated
as follows:

Stormwater flood management
(grants for projects outside the Central Valley).

300

Flood protection corridors and bypasses;
floodplain mapping.

290

• State Central Valley Flood Control System and
Delta Levees—$3 Billion. To evaluate, repair,
and restore existing levees in the state’s Central
Valley flood control system; to improve or add
facilities in order to increase flood protection
for urban areas in the state’s Central Valley flood
control system; and to reduce the risk of levee
failure in the Delta region through grants to local
agencies and direct spending by the state.
• Flood Control Subventions—$500 Million. To
provide funds to local governments for the state’s
share of costs for locally sponsored, federally
authorized flood control projects outside the
Central Valley system.
• Stormwater
Flood
Management—$300
Million. For grants to local agencies outside of
the Central Valley system for projects to manage
stormwater.
• Statewide Flood Protection Corridors and
Bypasses—$290 Million. To protect, create, and
enhance flood protection corridors, including
flood control bypasses and setback levees; as
well as for floodplain mapping.
38 | Analysis

Amount
(In Millions)

State Central Valley flood control
system repairs and improvements;
Delta levee repairs and maintenance.

Total

$3,000

$4,090

FISCAL EFFECTS
Bond Costs. The costs of these bonds would
depend on interest rates in effect at the time they
are sold and the time period over which they are
repaid. The state would likely make principal and
interest payments from the state’s General Fund
over a period of about 30 years. If the bonds were
sold at an average interest rate of 5 percent, the
cost would be about $8 billion to pay off both the
principal ($4.1 billion) and interest ($3.9 billion).
The average payment would be about $266 million
per year.
Property Tax-Related Impacts. The measure
provides funds for land acquisition by the state
for flood management, including the development
of bypasses and setback levees. Under state law,
property owned by government entities is exempt
from property taxation. To the extent that this

DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND FLOOD PREVENTION prop
BOND ACT OF 2006.

1E

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

measure results in property being exempted from
taxation due to acquisitions by governments, local
governments would receive reduced property tax
revenues. Because the measure does not specify
what portion of the bond funds will be used for
acquisitions, the impact on local property tax
revenues statewide is unknown, but is potentially
up to several million dollars annually.

Operational Costs. To the extent that bond
funds are used by state and local governments to
purchase property or develop a new flood control
project, these governments would incur unknown
additional costs to operate or maintain the properties
or projects.

1E

For text of Proposition 1E see page 125.

Analysis | 39

Prop DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND FLOOD PREVENTION

1E BOND ACT OF 2006.
ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 1E

1E

YES ON PROPOSITION 1E: PROTECT AGAINST
FLOODS, PREVENT OCEAN POLLUTION, SAFEGUARD
CLEAN DRINKING WATER
California continually faces natural disasters—from
earthquakes and fires to floods and mudslides. Proposition
lE is critical to prepare for these natural disasters and ensure
we always have enough clean water to meet our needs.
YES ON 1E: PROTECT HOMES, PREVENT LOSS OF
LIFE
Our nation learned a tragic lesson from Hurricane
Katrina—we cannot continue to neglect our unsafe levees
and flood control systems. One catastrophic flood would
impact the entire state and disrupt the supply of clean
drinking water to major cities.
Proposition 1E expedites urgent projects to protect homes
and lives across the state:
• Urgent repairs and essential improvements to levees and
flood control facilities
• Increased flood protection for urban areas
• Evaluation and repair of the current flood control system
“Californians deserve to know that their homes and
families are protected from flooding, caused by levee failure
in the Central Valley, or flash flooding in Southern California
or coastal areas. Proposition 1E is vital to the state’s ability
to ensure flood safety throughout the state.”—Lester Snow,
Director, California Department of Water Resources
YES ON 1E: PROTECT OUR OCEANS AND OUR
SUPPLY OF CLEAN, SAFE DRINKING WATER
Outdated flood control systems can threaten drinking
water supplies, pollute streams, and foul beaches.
• Some cities rely on water mains and sewers more than a
century old that can fail at any time. Experts say that water
pressure inside the pipes is often the only thing keeping
them from collapsing.
• In 2001, sewer spills and overflows forced officials to issue
over 2,000 beach closings and health advisories. Spills

and overflows are generally caused by overused and
antiquated wastewater systems.
Proposition 1E helps ensure that clean water is available
for all Californians all the time by providing funds to rebuild
out-of-date systems to prevent pollution and safeguard water
sources.
YES ON 1E: STRICT ACCOUNTABILITY AND NO
NEW TAXES
Proposition 1E won’t raise taxes to pay for these important
infrastructure improvements. By building safeguards now,
with current revenues, we can limit the impact of disasters
when they do hit. And, Prop. 1E includes annual audits and
tough fiscal safeguards to ensure the money is spent wisely.
YES ON 1E: PART OF A LONG-TERM PLAN TO
REBUILD CALIFORNIA
Proposition 1E is part of the Rebuild California Plan,
which uses the taxes we’re already paying to build the roads,
housing, schools, and water systems we need to sustain our
economy and our quality of life for the long-term.
The Rebuild California Plan: YES ON 1A, 1B, 1C, 1D,
and 1E
California’s population will reach 50 million in the next 20
years—twice what our current infrastructure was designed
for—and it can’t be rebuilt overnight. That’s why we’ve got
to start now.
To learn more about how this infrastructure plan will benefit
you and your community, visit www.ReadForYourself.org.
YES on 1E: Clean Water, Flood Protection, and Disaster
Preparedness.
HENRY RENTERIA, Director
California Office of Emergency Services
MICHAEL L. WARREN, President
California Fire Chiefs Association
LINDA ADAMS, Secretary
California Environmental Protection Agency

REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 1E
After reading Prop. 1E, it won’t surprise you to learn that
the Legislature adopted it after 3 a.m. when they got tired of
arguing. They couldn’t agree on a list of projects or even a
list of priorities; they could only agree that THEY WANT
MORE OF YOUR MONEY right away. How typical! That’s
what this $4,090,000,000.00 bond is all about: raising taxes
to give Sacramento politicians a blank check based on vague
promises that they won’t waste our money this time. It’s like
giving a drunk one more drink for the drive home.
Our legislators have been ignoring public levees for years.
Now, instead of allocating a small portion of our recordbreaking revenues for levees, they want to borrow money for
thirty years for repairs that will need to be repaired again
long before this bond is paid off. What will we do then?
40 | Arguments

This is a TAX INCREASE. Taxpayers will be forced to spend
over $8,200,000,000 to pay back this bond with interest!
At recent prices, this proposal contains funding for
about 25 miles of levees, but California has far more than
2,000 miles of levees to maintain. Since this measure does
nothing to reform our crazy spending practices and policies,
we might not even get 25 miles of repairs. What is worse,
with politicians in charge of selecting the projects (not
hydrologists, scientists, and engineers), funding will be
based on political influence rather than critical need. This is
a recipe for disaster.
Please Vote “NO” on 1E.

THOMAS N. HUDSON, Executive Director
The California Taxpayer Protection Committee

Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.

DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND FLOOD PREVENTION Prop
BOND ACT OF 2006.

1E

ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 1E
We need strong levees and clean water, but Proposition
1E is the wrong solution. This measure is full of misguided
priorities and doesn’t have any controls on funds. The most
important thing we can do is to make sure we have enough
water for our growing population, but 1E doesn’t spend a
cent on that.
Prop. 1E sounds good, but it means higher taxes for
projects that local and federal governments should already
be doing.
—Proposition 1E won’t provide “Clean Water” to drink:
California’s population is expected to grow to fifty million
people in the next decade. This will place an enormous strain
on our water supply. However, this bond will not provide
a single drop of drinking water for California’s growing
population. It will not build a single water storage reservoir or
water treatment facility. Yet it will give hundreds of millions
to private organizations to spend on their pet projects and lets
them use these funds for their own “administrative costs.”
—Benefits local urban projects:
Rural California loses under Proposition 1E. State
taxpayers’ money from these bonds will go to protecting
cities and their water supplies. These communities and their
local governments should be paying for their own water
supply improvements. Local tax dollars should be used to
fund these projects, not state funds.
—Federal responsibility:
Instead of putting the state in more debt to pay for these
levee repair projects, our state should be demanding more

federal funding. This is a federal responsibility. California
taxes are already high, and we shouldn’t have to pay more
taxes to protect ourselves because the federal government
won’t plan for disasters.
—Fiscally irresponsible:
By taking on what are really local and federal
responsibilities, we are encouraging mismanagement from
all levels of government. And, they will expect taxpayers
to foot the bill down the road rather than refocusing their
priorities.
—Californians must focus on our priorities:
While our economy is slowly recovering, approving
Proposition 1E would be like taking out a loan to buy new
patio furniture when you can’t afford to pay your mortgage
or rent. At the same time, this measure means less money
for other important priorities like education, health care, or
public safety.
The state can’t take responsibility for every project in
the state. These projects should be paid for by the local and
federal agencies responsible for these public safety issues. If
we don’t make them reprioritize their spending, our children
will continue to foot the bill for their short-sighted planning
and mismanagement.
Proposition 1E is bad for families, bad for taxpayers, and
bad for California. Vote NO on 1E.
THOMAS N. HUDSON, Executive Director
The California Taxpayer Protection Committee

REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 1E
Proposition 1E is vital to California’s disaster
preparedness—protecting lives and water supplies. It is our
responsibility to ensure that all Californians have access to
safe, clean drinking water at all times. Yes on 1E does that
without raising taxes, and it leverages additional federal and
local funding.
WE CANNOT AFFORD TO NEGLECT OUR WATER
SUPPLY AND FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEMS
If we wait for others to fix our unsafe levees and flood
control systems, we are putting our homes, drinking water
supplies, and children at risk in every corner of the state. By
building safeguards now, we can limit the impact of disasters
when they do hit. Yes on 1E provides:
• Increased flood protection for urban and rural areas,
meaning a stable, clean water supply.
• Repaired and improved levees.
• Updated flood control systems—to prevent failures that
can pollute our streams and oceans.
FISCALLY RESPONSIBLE
Proposition 1E uses the taxes we are already paying to
make these important infrastructure improvements. Utilizing

federal and local matching funds means we can complete
more of these important projects in communities across
the state. And, 1E has important accountability standards,
including independent audits, to ensure money is spent
wisely.
Proposition 1E is part of the Rebuild California Plan. It will
provide the flood protection vital to sustaining our economy,
protecting our supply of drinking water, and preserving our
quality of life for the long term.
YES on 1E: Clean Water, Flood Protection, and Disaster
Preparedness for Our Future.
THOMAS A. NASSIF, President
Western Growers
LINDA ADAMS, Secretary
California Environmental Protection Agency
PETER SILVA, Former Vice Chair
State Water Resources Control Board

Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.

Arguments | 41

1E

PROPOSITION

83

SEX OFFENDERS. SEXUALLY VIOLENT PREDATORS.
PUNISHMENT, RESIDENCE RESTRICTIONS AND MONITORING.
INITIATIVE STATUTE.

Official Title and Summary

Prepared by the Attorney General

SEX OFFENDERS. SEXUALLY VIOLENT PREDATORS.
PUNISHMENT, RESIDENCE RESTRICTIONS AND MONITORING.
INITIATIVE STATUTE.
• Increases penalties for violent and habitual sex offenders and child molesters.
• Prohibits registered sex offenders from residing within 2,000 feet of any school or park.
• Requires lifetime Global Positioning System monitoring of felony registered sex offenders.
• Expands definition of a sexually violent predator.
• Changes current two-year involuntary civil commitment for a sexually violent predator to an
indeterminate commitment, subject to annual review by the Director of Mental Health and subsequent
ability of sexually violent predator to petition court for sexually violent predator’s conditional release
or unconditional discharge.

83

Summary of Legislative Analyst’s Estimate of Net State and Local Government Fiscal Impact:
• Net state prison, parole, and mental health program costs of several tens of millions of dollars initially,
growing to a couple hundred million dollars annually within ten years.
• Potential one-time state mental hospital and prison capital outlay costs eventually reaching several
hundred million dollars.
• Net state and local costs for court and jail operations are unknown.
Analysis by the Legislative Analyst

BACKGROUND
Definition of Sex Offenses. Sex offenses are crimes
of a sexual nature. They vary in type and can be
misdemeanors or felonies. For example, distribution of
obscene material is a misdemeanor and rape is a felony
sex offense. Felony offenses are more serious crimes
than misdemeanors.
Punishment for Committing Sex Offenses. Current
law defines the penalties for conviction of sex-related
crimes. The punishment depends primarily on the type
and severity of the specific offense. Conviction of a
misdemeanor sex offense is punishable by up to a year
in county jail, probation, fines, or a combination of the
three. Conviction of a felony sex offense can result in
the same penalties as a misdemeanor or a sentence to
state prison for up to a life term. The penalty assigned
by the court for a felony conviction depends on the
specific crime committed, as well as other factors such as
the specific circumstances of the offense and the criminal
42 | Title and Summary/Analysis

history of the offender. There are about 8,000 persons
convicted of a felony sex offense in California each year.
Of these, about 39 percent are sent to state prison. Most
of the rest are supervised on probation in the community
(5 percent), sentenced to county jail (1 percent), or both
(53 percent).
Sex
Offender
Registration,
Residency
Requirements, and Monitoring. Current law
requires offenders convicted of specified felony or
misdemeanor sex crimes to register with local law
enforcement officials. There are approximately 90,000
registered sex offenders in California.
Current law bars parolees convicted of specified sex
offenses against a child from residing within one-quarter
or one-half mile (1,320 or 2,640 feet, respectively)
of a school. The longer distance is for those parolees
identified as high risk to reoffend by the California
Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (CDCR).

SEX OFFENDERS. SEXUALLY VIOLENT PREDATORS. prop
PUNISHMENT, RESIDENCE RESTRICTIONS AND MONITORING.
INITIATIVE STATUTE.

83

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)
The CDCR utilizes Global Positioning System
(GPS) monitoring devices to track the location of some
sex offenders on parole. Currently, this monitoring
is limited to about 1,000 sex offenders who have
been identified as high risk to reoffend. Some county
probation departments also use GPS to monitor some
sex offenders on probation.
Sexually Violent Predators (SVP). Specified sex
offenders who are completing their prison sentences are
referred by CDCR to the Department of Mental Health
(DMH) for screening and evaluation to determine
whether they meet the criteria for an SVP. Under current
law, an SVP is defined as “a person who has been
convicted of a sexually violent offense against two or
more victims and who has a diagnosed mental disorder
that makes the person a danger to the health and safety
of others in that it is likely that he or she will engage
in sexually violent criminal behavior.” Those offenders
who are found to meet the criteria are referred to district
attorneys. District attorneys then determine whether to
pursue their commitment by the courts to treatment in a
state mental hospital as an SVP.
Offenders subject to SVP proceedings are often
represented by public defenders. While these court
proceedings are pending, offenders who have not
completed their prison sentences continue to be held
in prison. However, if an offender’s prison sentence
has been completed, he or she may be held either in
county custody or in a state mental hospital. Offenders
designated as SVPs by the courts are committed to a
state mental hospital for up to two years. An offender
can be recommitted by the courts in subsequent court
proceedings.
As noted above, state mental hospitals hold sex
offenders who have been committed as SVPs. State
mental hospitals also hold some sex offenders who have
completed their prison sentences, but are still undergoing
SVP evaluations or commitment proceedings. As of
June 2006, 456 sex offenders were being held in state
hospitals with a commitment by a court as an SVP. In
addition, 188 sex offenders were being held in state
mental hospitals, and 81 were in county custody pending
the completion of commitment proceedings.

For text of Proposition 83 see page 127.

PROPOSAL
Increase Penalties for Sex Offenses. This measure
increases the penalties for specified sex offenses. It does
this in several ways. In some cases:
• It broadens the definition of certain sex offenses.
For example, the measure expands the definition
of aggravated sexual assault of a child to include
offenders who are at least seven years older than
the victim, rather than the ten years required under
current law.
• It provides for longer penalties for specified sex
offenses. For example, it expands the list of crimes that
qualify for life sentences in prison to include assault to
commit rape during the commission of a first degree
burglary.
• It prohibits probation in lieu of prison for some sex
offenses, including spousal rape and lewd or lascivious
acts.
• It eliminates early release credits for some inmates
convicted of certain sex offenses (for example,
habitual sex offenders who have multiple convictions
for specified felony sex offenses such as rape).
• It extends parole for specified sex offenders,
including habitual sex offenders.
These changes would result in longer prison and
parole terms for the affected offenders.
Finally, this measure increases court-imposed fees
currently charged to offenders who are required to
register as sex offenders.
Require GPS Devices for Registered Sex Offenders.
Generally under this measure, individuals who have been
convicted of a felony sex offense that requires registration
and have been sent to prison would be monitored by GPS
devices while on parole and for the remainder of their
lives.
The CDCR would be authorized to collect fees
from affected sex offenders to cover the costs of
GPS monitoring. The amount of fees collected from
individual offenders would vary depending on their
ability to pay.

Analysis | 43

83

prop SEX OFFENDERS. SEXUALLY VIOLENT PREDATORS.
RESIDENCE RESTRICTIONS AND MONITORING.
83 PUNISHMENT,
INITIATIVE STATUTE.
Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)
Limit Where Registered Sex Offenders May Live.
This measure bars any person required to register as a
sex offender from living within 2,000 feet (about twofifths of a mile) of any school or park. A violation of this
provision would be a misdemeanor offense, as well as
a parole violation for parolees. The longer current law
restriction of one-half mile (2,640 feet) for specified
high-risk sex offenders on parole would remain in effect.
In addition, the measure authorizes local governments
to further expand these residency restrictions.

83

Change SVP Law. This measure generally makes
more sex offenders eligible for an SVP commitment. It
does this by (1) reducing from two to one the number
of prior victims of sexually violent offenses that qualify
an offender for an SVP commitment and (2) making
additional prior offenses—such as certain crimes
committed by a person while a juvenile—“countable”
for purposes of an SVP commitment. The measure
also requires that SVPs be committed by the court to
a state mental hospital for an undetermined period of
time rather than the renewable two-year commitment
provided for under existing law. As under current law,
once an offender had received a commitment as an SVP,
he or she could later be released from a state hospital by
the courts if (1) DMH determined the individual should
no longer be held or (2) the offender successfully
petitioned a court for release.
The measure also changes the standard for release
of SVPs from a state mental hospital. For example,
current law generally requires DMH to examine the
mental condition of a sex offender each year. This
measure specifically requires DMH, as part of this
annual review, to examine whether a person being held
in a state hospital as an SVP still meets the definition
of an SVP, whether release is in the best interest of the
person, and whether conditions could be imposed at time
of release that would adequately protect the community.
The impact of these changes on the number of SVPs is
unknown.

FISCAL EFFECTS
This measure would have a number of significant
fiscal effects on state and local agencies. The major
fiscal effects are discussed below.
44 | Analysis

State Prison Costs. This measure would increase the
prison population, resulting in a significant increase
in prison operating costs. In particular, increasing
sentences for sex offenders would result in some
sex offenders being sentenced to and remaining in
prison for longer periods, resulting in a larger prison
population over time. This would result in costs of
unknown magnitude, but likely to be in the tens of
millions of dollars annually once fully implemented in
less than ten years. It is also possible that this measure
could eventually result in significant additional capital
outlay costs to accommodate the increase in the inmate
population.
The impact on the prison population of requiring sex
offenders to wear GPS devices is unclear. On the one
hand, GPS monitoring could increase the number of
offenders who are identified and returned to prison for
violating the conditions of their parole or committing
new crimes. On the other hand, GPS monitoring could
act as a deterrent for some offenders from committing
new violations or crimes, hence reducing the likelihood
that they return to prison. Whatever net impact GPS does
have on returns to prison will also affect parole, court,
and local law enforcement workloads and associated
costs.
State Parole and GPS Monitoring Costs. The
initiative’s provisions requiring specified registered sex
offenders to wear GPS devices while on parole and for the
remainder of their lives would result in additional costs
for GPS equipment, as well as for supervision staff to
track offenders in the community. These costs are likely
to be in the several tens of millions of dollars annually
within a few years. These costs would grow to about $100
million annually after ten years, with costs continuing to
increase significantly in subsequent years.
Because the measure does not specify whether the
state or local governments would be responsible for
monitoring sex offenders who have been discharged
from state parole supervision, it is unclear whether local
governments would bear some of these long-term costs.
These costs likely would be partially offset by several
million dollars annually in court and parolee fees
authorized by the measure, though the exact amount
would largely depend on offenders’ ability to pay.

SEX OFFENDERS. SEXUALLY VIOLENT PREDATORS. prop
PUNISHMENT, RESIDENCE RESTRICTIONS AND MONITORING.
INITIATIVE STATUTE.

83

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)
State SVP Program Costs. By making more sex
offenders eligible for SVP commitments, this measure
would result in increased state costs generally in the
following categories:
• Referral and Commitment Costs. These costs are
mainly associated with screening sex offenders
referred by CDCR to DMH to determine if they
merit a full evaluation, performing such evaluations,
and providing expert testimony at court commitment
hearings. This measure would increase these state
costs probably by the low tens of millions of dollars
annually. These costs would begin to occur in the
initial year of implementation.
• State Hospital Costs. State costs to staff, maintain,
and operate the mental hospitals could reach
$100 million annually within a decade and would
continue to grow significantly thereafter. These costs
would result from additional SVP commitments
to state mental hospitals, as well as holding some
sex offenders—who have completed their prison
sentences—in state mental hospitals while they are
being evaluated to determine whether they should
receive an SVP commitment. (Some of the sex
offenders undergoing evaluation as SVPs might also
be held in county jails.)
Additional SVP commitments could eventually
result in one-time capital outlay costs of up to
several hundred million dollars for the construction
of additional state hospital beds.
The additional operational and capital outlay costs
would be partly offset in the long term. This is
because the longer prison sentences for certain sex
crimes required by this measure would delay SVP
referrals and commitments to state mental hospitals.
These costs would also be partly offset because the
change from two-year commitments to commitments
for an undetermined period of time is likely to
reduce DMH’s costs for SVP evaluations and court
testimony. However, our analysis indicates that on
balance the operating and capital outlay costs to the

For text of Proposition 83 see page 127.

state are likely to be substantially greater than the
savings.
Court and Jail Fiscal Impacts. This measure would
also affect state and local costs associated with court
and jail operations. For example, the additional SVP
commitment petitions resulting from this measure
would increase court costs for hearing these civil cases.
Also, county jail operating costs would increase to the
extent that offenders who have court decisions pending
on their SVP cases were held in county jail facilities.
The provision making it unlawful for sex offenders to
reside within 2,000 feet of a school or park could result
in additional court and jail costs to prosecute violations
of this provision.
Other provisions of this measure could result
in savings for court and jail operations. The
measure’s provisions providing for the indeterminate
commitment of SVPs, instead of the current two-year
recommitment process, would reduce county costs
for SVP commitment proceedings. Provisions of this
measure would increase the length of time that some
sex offenders spend in prison or mental hospitals. To
the extent that this occurs, these offenders would likely
commit fewer crimes in the community, resulting in
some court and local criminal justice savings.
Given the potential for the factors identified above to
offset each other, the net fiscal impact of this measure
on state and local costs for the court and jail operations
cannot be determined at this time.
Other Impacts on State and Local Governments.
There could be other savings to the extent that offenders
imprisoned for longer periods require fewer government
services, or commit fewer crimes that result in victimrelated government costs. Alternatively, there could be
an offsetting loss of revenue to the extent that offenders
serving longer prison terms would have become
taxpaying citizens under current law. The extent and
magnitude of these impacts is unknown.

Analysis | 45

83

Prop SEX OFFENDERS. SEXUALLY VIOLENT PREDATORS.
RESIDENCE RESTRICTIONS AND MONITORING.
83 PUNISHMENT,
INITIATIVE STATUTE.

ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 83

83

Proposition 83—JESSICA’S LAW—will protect our
children by keeping child molesters in prison longer; keeping
them away from schools and parks; and monitoring their
movements after they are released.
A rape or sexual assault occurs every two minutes. A child
is abused or neglected every 35 seconds.
Over 85,000 registered sex offenders live in California.
Current law does not provide Law Enforcement with the tools
they need to keep track of these dangerous criminals. Secrecy
is the child molester’s biggest tool. How can we protect our
children if we don’t even know where the sex offenders are?
Proposition 83 is named after Jessica Lunsford, a 9-yearold girl who was kidnapped, assaulted, and buried alive by a
convicted sex offender who had failed to report where he lived.
Proposition 83 will:
Electronically monitor, through GPS tracking, dangerous
sex offenders for life once they finish their prison terms.
Require dangerous sex offenders to serve their entire
sentence and not be released early for any reason.
Create PREDATOR FREE ZONES around schools and
parks to prevent sex offenders from living near where our
children learn and play.
Protect children from INTERNET PREDATORS by
cracking down on people who use the Internet to sexually
victimize children.
Require
MANDATORY
MINIMUM
PRISON
SENTENCES for dangerous child molesters and sex
criminals.
Allow prosecutors to charge criminals who possess child
pornography with a felony. (Current law treats child porn like
trespassing or driving on a suspended license!)
Crime Victims and Law Enforcement leaders urge you to
pass this much needed reform. Jessica’s Law is supported by:

• California State Sheriffs Association • California District
Attorneys Association • California Organization of Police
and Sheriffs • California Police Chiefs Association • Crime
Victims United of California • California Women’s Leadership
Association • California Sexual Assault Investigators
Association • Women Prosecutors of California • Mothers
Against Predators • Mark Lunsford, father of Jessica Lunsford
• Numerous cities, counties, and local sheriffs, police chiefs,
and elected officials.
Law enforcement professionals know there is a high risk
that a sexual predator will commit additional sex crimes after
being released from prison. Prop. 83 keeps these dangerous
criminals in prison longer and keeps track of them once they
are released.
Proposition 83 means safer schools, safer parks, and safer
neighborhoods.
Proposition 83 means dangerous child molesters will be
kept away from our children and monitored for life.
Proposition 83 means predatory sex criminals will be
punished and serve their full sentence in every case.
Our families deserve the protection of a tough sex offender
punishment and control law. The State Legislature has failed
to pass Jessica’s Law time and time again. WE CANNOT
WAIT ANOTHER DAY TO PROTECT OUR KIDS.
Vote YES on Proposition 83—JESSICA’S LAW—to protect
our families and make California a safer place for all of us.
For more information, please visit www.JessicasLaw2006.com.
GOVERNOR ARNOLD SCHWARZENEGGER
DISTRICT ATTORNEY BONNIE DUMANIS
San Diego County
HARRIET SALARNO, President
Crime Victims United of California

REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 83
The argument in favor of Proposition 83 ignores the sad
lessons learned by other states. For example, the leading
prosecutors’ association in Iowa, which once urged the
adoption of laws similar to Proposition 83, now argues
that those laws be repealed because they have proven to be
ineffective, a drain on crucial law enforcement resources,
and far too costly to taxpayers. California cannot afford to
repeat that mistake.
The Proponents claim that the law is directed at “child
molesters” and “dangerous sex offenders,” but its most punitive
and restrictive measures would apply far more broadly: even
to those convicted of misdemeanor, nonviolent offenses. They
would also apply to people who have long led law-abiding lives
for years after completing their sentences. More specifically,
the Proposition would:
— Prohibit thousands of misdemeanor offenders from living
near a school or park for the rest of their lives.

46 | Arguments

— Impose lifetime GPS monitoring on fi rst-time offenders
convicted of nonviolent offenses. For example, a
19-year-old boy could be subjected to lifetime monitoring
after a conviction for having sexual contact with his
17-year-old girlfriend.
— Impose both lifetime residence restrictions and lifetime
GPS monitoring on thousands of people who have lived
law abiding lives for years or even decades.
These results are simply wrong.
Here’s the bottom line. California has laws that protect us
from Sexually Violent Predators, and this Initiative could have
focused on such dangerous persons. But, it does not! Don’t be
fooled. VOTE NO ON PROPOSITION 83.
CARLEEN R. ARLIDGE, President
California Attorneys for Criminal Justice

Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.

SEX OFFENDERS. SEXUALLY VIOLENT PREDATORS. Prop
PUNISHMENT, RESIDENCE RESTRICTIONS AND MONITORING.
INITIATIVE STATUTE.

83

ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 83
Proposition 83 would cost taxpayers an estimated $500
million but would not increase our children’s safety. Instead,
by diluting law enforcement resources, the initiative would
actually reduce most children’s security while increasing the
danger for those most at risk:
—First, the initiative proposes to “monitor” every
registered sex offender, on the misguided theory that each is
likely to reoffend against “strangers.” But law enforcement
experience shows that when sex registrants reoffend, their
targets are usually members of their own household. This
Proposition would do nothing to safeguard children in their
own homes, even though they are most at risk.
—Second, the Proposition would not focus on the real
problem—dangerous sex offenders—but would instead waste
limited resources tracking persons who pose no risk. The new
law would create an expensive tracking system for thousands of
registrants who were convicted of minor, nonviolent offenses,
perhaps years or decades ago. Law enforcement’s resources
should be directed toward high risk individuals living in our
neighborhoods.
Proposition 83 would have other dangerous, unintended
consequences. The Proposition’s monitoring provisions
would be least effective against those posing the greatest
danger. Obviously, dangerous offenders would be the least
likely to comply, so the proposed law would push the more
serious offenders underground, where they would be less
effectively monitored by police. In addition, by prohibiting
sex offenders from living within 2,000 feet of a park or
school, the initiative would force many offenders from
urban to rural areas with smaller police forces. A high
concentration of sex offenders in rural neighborhoods will
not serve public safety.

Prosecutors in the State of Iowa know from sad
experience that this type of residency restriction does
not work. In 2001, Iowa adopted a similar law, but the
association of county prosecutors that once advocated for
that law now say that it “does not provide the protection that
was originally intended and that the cost of enforcing the
requirement and unintended effects on families of offenders
warrant replacing the restriction with more effective
protective measures.” (February 14, 2006, “Statement on
Sex Offender Residency Restrictions in Iowa,” Iowa County
Attorneys Association.) (To see the full Statement, go to:
www.iowa-icaa.com/index.htm or www.cacj.org.)
A summary of the Iowa prosecutors’ findings shows why
the Iowa law was a disaster and why Proposition 83 must be
rejected:
• Residency restrictions do not reduce sex offenses against
children or improve children’s safety.
• Residency restrictions will not be effective against 80 to
90% of sex crimes against children, because those crimes
are committed by a relative or acquaintance of the child.
• Residency restrictions cause sex registrants to disappear
from the registration system, harming the interest of
public safety.
• Enforcing the residency restrictions is expensive and
ineffective.
• The law also caused unwarranted disruption to the
innocent families of ex-offenders.
For all of these reasons, vote “No” on Proposition 83!
CARLEEN R. ARLIDGE, President
California Attorneys for Criminal Justice

REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 83
Don’t be fooled by the false arguments the group of lawyers
against Proposition 83 is making. They represent criminal
defense attorneys who make their living defending criminals.
Of course they don’t want tougher laws!
Let’s consider the FACTS:
• EVERY major POLICE, SHERIFF, and DISTRICT
ATTORNEY organization in California strongly supports
Jessica’s Law.
• EVERY major CRIME VICTIM organization in
California strongly supports Jessica’s Law.
• Thousands of dangerous sexual predators are living in
our communities and neighborhoods, and police do not
have the tools they need to track them down.
• Jessica’s Law will KEEP TRACK OF FELONY SEX
OFFENDERS after their release from prison by requiring
them to wear a GPS tracking device at all times.
• Jessica’s Law will STOP dangerous sex offenders from
living near schools and parks where they can stalk and
prey on our children.
Your YES vote on Proposition 83—Jessica’s Law—will

give law enforcement the tools they need to stop sexual
predators before they strike again.
The man who confessed to murdering nine-yearold Jessica Lunsford was a convicted sex offender who
failed to register with local police. He took Jessica
from her bedroom window, assaulted her for three
days, and buried her alive only a few doors from
her home.
GPS MONITORING COULD HAVE SAVED JESSICA’S
LIFE! Tragically, it’s too late to save Jessica Lunsford. But
it’s not too late to prevent countless other children from being
attacked and murdered by sexual predators.
Vote YES on 83—Jessica’s Law.
MONTY HOLDEN, Executive Director
California Organization of Police and Sheriffs (COPS)
STEVE IPSEN, President
California Deputy District Attorneys Association
SHERIFF GARY PENROD, President
California State Sheriffs Association

Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.

Arguments | 47

83

PROPOSITION

84

WATER QUALITY, SAFETY AND SUPPLY.
FLOOD CONTROL. NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION.
PARK IMPROVEMENTS. BONDS. INITIATIVE STATUTE.

Official Title and Summary

Prepared by the Attorney General

WATER QUALITY, SAFETY AND SUPPLY.
FLOOD CONTROL. NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION.
PARK IMPROVEMENTS. BONDS. INITIATIVE STATUTE.
• Funds projects relating to safe drinking water, water quality and supply, flood control, waterway
and natural resource protection, water pollution and contamination control, state and local park
improvements, public access to natural resources, and water conservation efforts.
• Provides funding for emergency drinking water, and exempts such expenditures from public contract
and procurement requirements to ensure immediate action for public safety.
• Authorizes $5,388,000,000 in general obligation bonds to fund projects and expenditures, to be repaid
from the state’s General Fund.

Summary of Legislative Analyst’s Estimate of Net State and Local Government Fiscal Impact:

84

• State cost of about $10.5 billion over 30 years to pay off both the principal ($5.4 billion) and interest
($5.1 billion) costs on the bonds. Payments of about $350 million per year.
• Reduction in local property tax revenues of several million dollars annually.
• Unknown costs, potentially tens of millions of dollars per year, to state and local governments to
operate or maintain properties or projects acquired or developed with these bond funds.

48 | Title and Summary

WATER QUALITY, SAFETY AND SUPPLY. prop
FLOOD CONTROL. NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION.
PARK IMPROVEMENTS. BONDS. INITIATIVE STATUTE.

84

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst

BACKGROUND
State Spending on Resources Programs. The
state operates a variety of programs to conserve
natural resources, protect the environment, provide
flood control, and offer recreational opportunities
for the public. The state also operates a program
to plan for future water supplies, flood control,
and other water-related requirements of a growing
population. In addition to direct state expenditures,
the state also provides grants and loans to local
governments and nonprofit organizations for
similar purposes. These programs support a variety
of specific purposes, including:
• Natural Resource Conservation. The state has
provided funds to purchase, protect, and improve
natural areas—including wilderness and openspace areas; wildlife habitat; coastal wetlands;
forests; and rivers, lakes, streams, and their
watersheds.
• Safe Drinking Water. The state has made loans
and grants to public water systems for facility
improvements to meet state and federal safe
drinking water standards.
• Flood Control. The state has funded the
construction and repair of flood control projects
in the state Central Valley flood control system.
The state has also provided financial assistance
to local agencies for local flood control projects
in the Sacramento-San Joaquin River Delta and
in other areas outside the Central Valley.
• Other Water Quality and Water Supply Projects.
The state has made available funds for various
other projects throughout the state that improve
water quality and/or the reliability of water
supplies. For example, the state has provided
loans and grants to local agencies for the
construction and implementation of wastewater
treatment, water conservation, and water
pollution reduction projects.

For text of Proposition 84 see page 138.

• State and Local Parks. The state operates the
state park system and has provided funds to local
governments for the acquisition, maintenance,
and operation of local and regional parks.
Funding for Resources Programs. Funding
for these various programs has traditionally come
from General Fund revenues, federal funds, and
general obligation bonds. Since 1996, voters have
authorized approximately $11 billion in general
obligation bonds for various resources purposes.
Of this amount, approximately $1.4 billion is
projected to remain available for new projects
as of June 30, 2006, primarily for water-related
purposes. Legislation enacted earlier this year
provides $500 million from the General Fund for
emergency levee repairs and other flood controlrelated expenditures.

PROPOSAL
This initiative allows the state to sell $5.4 billion
in general obligation bonds for safe drinking water,
water quality, and water supply; flood control;
natural resource protection; and park improvements.
(See “An Overview of State Bond Debt” on page 96
for basic information on state general obligation
bonds.) Figure 1 (see next page) summarizes the
purposes for which the bond money would be
available for expenditure by various state agencies
and for loans and grants, primarily to local agencies
and nonprofit organizations. In order to spend
most of these bond funds, the measure requires
the Legislature to appropriate them in the annual
budget act or other legislation.

FISCAL EFFECTS
Bond Costs. The cost of these bonds would
depend on interest rates in effect at the time they

Analysis | 49

84

prop WATER QUALITY, SAFETY AND SUPPLY.
CONTROL. NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION.
84 FLOOD
PARK IMPROVEMENTS. BONDS. INITIATIVE STATUTE.
Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)
FIGURE 1
Proposition 84: Uses of Bond Funds
Amount
(In Millions)

84

Water Quality

$1,525

• Integrated regional water management.
• Safe drinking water.
• Delta and agriculture water quality.

1,000
380
145

Protection of Rivers, Lakes, and Streams

$928

• Regional conservancies.
• Other projects—public access, river parkways, urban stream restoration,
California Conservation Corps.
• Delta and coastal fisheries restoration.
• Restoration of the San Joaquin River.
• Restoration projects related to the Colorado River.
• Stormwater pollution prevention.

279
189

Flood Control

$800

• State flood control projects—evaluation, system improvements, flood corridor program.
• Flood control projects in the Delta.
• Local flood control subventions (outside the Central Valley flood control system).
• Floodplain mapping and assistance for local land use planning.

315
275
180
30

Sustainable Communities and Climate Change Reduction

$580

• Local and regional parks.
• Urban water and energy conservation projects.
• Incentives for conservation in local planning.

400
90
90

Protection of Beaches, Bays, and Coastal Waters

$540

• Protection of various coastal areas and watersheds.
• Clean Beaches Program.
• California Ocean Protection Trust Fund—marine resources, sustainable fisheries, and
marine wildlife conservation.

360
90
90

Parks and Natural Education Facilities

$500

• State park system—acquisition, development, and restoration.
• Nature education and research facilities.

400
100

Forest and Wildlife Conservation

$450

• Wildlife habitat protection.
• Forest conservation.
• Protection of ranches, farms, and oak woodlands.

225
180
45

Statewide Water Planning

$65

• Planning for future water needs, water conveyance systems, and flood control projects.

65

Total
50 | Analysis

180
100
90
90

$5,388

WATER QUALITY, SAFETY AND SUPPLY. prop
FLOOD CONTROL. NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION.
PARK IMPROVEMENTS. BONDS. INITIATIVE STATUTE.

84

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

are sold and the time period over which they are
repaid. The state would likely make principal and
interest payments from the state’s General Fund
over a period of about 30 years. If the bonds were
sold at an average interest rate of 5 percent, the cost
would be about $10.5 billion to pay off both the
principal ($5.4 billion) and interest ($5.1 billion).
The average payment would be about $350 million
per year.
Property Tax-Related Impacts. The initiative
provides funds for land acquisition by governments
and nonprofit organizations for various purposes.
Under state law, property owned by government
entities and by nonprofit organizations (under
specified conditions) is exempt from property

For text of Proposition 84 see page 138.

taxation. To the extent that this initiative results
in property being exempted from taxation due
to acquisitions by governments and nonprofit
organizations, local governments would receive
reduced property tax revenues. We estimate these
reduced property tax revenues would be several
million dollars annually.
Operational Costs. State and local governments
may incur additional costs to operate or maintain the
properties or projects, such as new park facilities,
that are purchased or developed with these bond
funds. The amount of these potential additional
costs is unknown, but could be tens of millions of
dollars per year.

84

Analysis | 51

Prop WATER QUALITY, SAFETY AND SUPPLY.
CONTROL. NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION.
84 FLOOD
PARK IMPROVEMENTS. BONDS. INITIATIVE STATUTE.

ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 84

84

PROP. 84 PROTECTS CALIFORNIA’S WATER, LAND,
AND COASTLINE.
California is growing rapidly, putting new pressure each
year on our water resources, land, coast, and ocean. Prop. 84
protects these vital natural resources, which are essential to
our health, our economy, and our quality of life.
YES on 84 PROTECTS DRINKING WATER QUALITY.
The water we drink and use to grow our food is vulnerable
to contamination. Prop. 84 will:
• Remove dangerous chemicals from our water supply.
• Prevent future groundwater contamination.
• Prevent toxic runoff from flowing into our water.
Prop. 84 is essential to assure our communities CLEAN,
SAFE DRINKING WATER.
Last year, there were more than 1,200 beach closing or
advisory days in California. Prop. 84 will help prevent toxic
pollution from storm drains from contaminating coastal waters
and endangering public health.
YES on 84 ASSURES A RELIABLE WATER SUPPLY.
Prop. 84 will increase the reliability of California’s water
supply, through conservation and other programs. Every
region in the state will benefit from this measure, while being
given local control over specific projects to improve local
water supply and water quality.
YES on 84 PROTECTS OUR COASTLINE AND
CALIFORNIA’S NATURAL BEAUTY.
The measure will help clean and safeguard the ocean and
beaches all along California’s coastline, including the San
Diego, Santa Monica, Monterey, and San Francisco Bays. It
will also provide for safe neighborhood parks and protect the
rivers and lakes in which we swim and fish.
YES on 84 PROTECTS AGAINST FLOODING.
An earthquake or a series of major storms could damage
our state’s levees, causing dangerous flooding and potentially
leaving up to 23 million Californians without safe drinking
water.

Efforts are underway to address this urgent threat to
public safety and our water supply, but much more needs
to be done. Flood control experts agree that Prop. 84 is an
important step forward and complements ongoing efforts to
improve flood control in California.
YES on PROP. 84 PROTECTS CALIFORNIA’S
ECONOMY.
Clean beaches, rivers, and lakes are crucial to tourism,
which contributes more than $88 billion to the state economy
each year and directly supports more than 900,000 jobs.
An adequate supply of clean, safe water is also needed for
California’s farms and cities. Prop. 84 protects the water that
our economy needs to thrive.
YES on 84 WILL NOT RAISE TAXES—AND
INCLUDES TOUGH FISCAL SAFEGUARDS. Prop. 84:
• Is funded entirely from existing revenues and will not
raise taxes.
• Will bring federal matching funds into California.
• Includes strict accountability provisions, including yearly
independent audits and a citizen’s oversight committee.
PLEASE JOIN US IN VOTING YES on 84.
Conservation groups, business organizations, and water
districts across California support Prop. 84. For more
information about the measure, please visit www.
CleanWater2006.com. Your YES vote will help protect our
health, economy, and quality of life now and in the years to
come.
PROTECT CALIFORNIA’S DRINKING WATER,
LAND, COAST, AND OCEAN. Vote YES on 84.
MARK BURGET, Executive Director
The Nature Conservancy
LARRY WILSON, Chair
Board of Directors, Santa Clara Valley Water District
E. RICHARD BROWN, Ph.D., Professor, School of Public
Health, University of California, Los Angeles

REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 84
Bond funds can be awarded to the same private
PROPOSITION 84 CANNOT DELIVER ON ITS
organizations that placed this initiative on the ballot,
PROMISES
campaigned for it, and bought advertising to promote it. This
It will not benefit everyone, but everyone will pay for
is a perversion of the initiative process.
it through higher taxes or budget cuts for education, law
enforcement, and health services.
NO on 84 SAVES MONEY FOR REAL FLOOD
CONTROL
NO on 84 PROTECTS THE PUBLIC TREASURY
Flood control is vital, but less than 15% of bond funds are
Prop. 84 gives state bureaucrats the power to spend
dedicated to that purpose—and that money could be chewed
your money without effective oversight. This proposal
up for studies, environmental planning, environmental
eliminates protections against corruption and favoritism in
mitigation, and bureaucratic administration. If bureaucratic
current law and it bypasses our competitive bidding system.
reports could stop flooding, we’d no longer have a problem.
It prevents audits by the State Controller, the State Auditor,
and even the Legislative Analyst. It exempts itself from
PLEASE JOIN US IN VOTING NO on 84.
the Administrative Procedures Act. Ask yourself why the
proponents fear routine audits.
BILL LEONARD, Member
NO on 84 SENDS SACRAMENTO THE RIGHT
California State Board of Equalization
MESSAGE: WE NEED A RELIABLE WATER SUPPLY
RON NEHRING, Senior Consultant
This water bond does not contain ANY funds for new
Americans for Tax Reform
reservoirs, aqueducts, or water storage! The water diversions
LEWIS K. UHLER, President
mandated by this bond will actually take away drinking
National Tax Limitation Committee
water from current sources.
NO o n 8 4 PROT E C TS YOU F ROM SPE C I A L
INTERESTS
52 | Arguments
Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.

WATER QUALITY, SAFETY AND SUPPLY. Prop
FLOOD CONTROL. NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION.
PARK IMPROVEMENTS. BONDS. INITIATIVE STATUTE.

84

ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 84
This measure should have been titled the “Special-InterestHidden-Agenda Bond” because it was placed on the ballot
by special interests who don’t really want you to know where
all your money is going to be squandered. Every special
interest that helped get this boondoggle on the ballot will get
a share of the taxpayers’ money, but ordinary taxpayers will
get nothing from this bond but higher taxes for the next three
decades.
This so-called “water bond” has no funding for dams or
water storage! The authors set aside billions for bureaucratic
studies, unnecessary protections for rats and weeds, and other
frivolous projects, but they couldn’t find a single penny to
build freshwater storage for our state’s growing population.
You have to read the text to believe it.
Only a very small portion of the funds from this enormous
bond would be available for repair and maintenance of our
levees, but Proposition 1E was placed on the ballot by the
Legislature to provide $4,090,000,000 for these same levees.
Common sense dictates that we should wait to see how that
money is spent before we authorize another $5,388,000,000
in new spending. It would be foolish to lock permanent
spending formulas in place, as this initiative seeks to do,
when we have no idea what our future needs will be once the
funds from Proposition 1E are spent.
This bond represents a huge tax increase. The proponents
seem eager to avoid this unpleasant fact, but voters need
to understand that bond repayment takes priority over all

other government spending. Once issued, bonds cannot be
cancelled, repudiated, or discharged in bankruptcy; they can
only be repaid with tax revenues. Our state already has a
$7 billion budget deficit, and there is no way to pay for this
gigantic bond without higher taxes.
Local projects should be funded at the local level. This
statewide bond is designed to force people in one part of
the state to pay for local projects on the other side of the
state. Why should people in Redding pay for urban parks in
San Diego? Why tax people in Los Angeles to pay for beetle
habitat restoration in Sutter County? This is poor tax policy,
and it was clearly designed to benefit the special interests
that put this measure on the ballot. We should expect local
communities to fund their own local parks and improvements;
statewide bonds should be reserved for state parks, colleges,
and other capital projects that benefit the whole state.
What is worse, this bond allows unelected, unaccountable
state bureaucrats to spend billions of dollars, with little or
no real public oversight. Sacramento bureaucrats and special
interests will love having a slush fund that they can spend
without the need for public hearings and public votes in the
Legislature—but we cannot allow that to happen.
Please join me in voting NO on Proposition 84.
BILL LEONARD, Member
California State Board of Equalization

REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 84
The opponent’s argument is simply wrong.
Proposition 84 provides clean water and protects our coast
without raising taxes. It is supported by a broad, bipartisan
coalition of public interest and business groups including the
League of Women Voters of California, Los Angeles Area
Chamber of Commerce, and The Nature Conservancy.
Here are the facts.
• Prop. 84 funds crucial projects needed to assure reliable
supplies of clean, safe drinking water.
• Prop. 84 protects all of California’s waters: our rivers,
lakes, streams, beaches, and bays.
• Prop. 84 includes strict financial accountability, including
a citizen oversight committee, annual independent audits,
and full public disclosure.
• Prop. 84 protects our families from toxic pollution, floods,
and other hazards through critical public safety projects
not funded by other measures.
YES on 84: BENEFITS ALL CALIFORNIANS
Prop. 84 funds local priorities to improve water quality
and supply in every region of the state.
YES on 84: SUPPORTED BY CALIFORNIA’S LOCAL
WATER DISTRICTS

Proposition 84 is so important that water districts that
provide drinking water to more than 23 million Californians
all urge YES on 84.
YES on 84: PROTECTS PUBLIC HEALTH
Prop. 84 removes dangerous contaminants from drinking
water, cleans up toxic chemicals that contaminate the fish we
eat, and keeps dangerous polluted runoff from flowing onto
our beaches and into our coastal waters.
YES on 84 protects our land, water, and public health, for
our families and for future generations.
Join local water districts, conservation organizations,
business groups, and public health experts in voting YES
on 84.
ERICH PFUEHLER, California Director
Clean Water Action
JEFF KIGHTLINGER, General Manager
Metropolitan Water District of Southern California
KAITILIN GAFFNEY, Conservation Director
The Ocean Conservancy

Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.

Arguments | 53

84

PROPOSITION

85

WAITING PERIOD AND PARENTAL NOTIFICATION BEFORE
TERMINATION OF MINOR’S PREGNANCY.
INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT.

Official Title and Summary

Prepared by the Attorney General

WAITING PERIOD AND PARENTAL NOTIFICATION BEFORE
TERMINATION OF MINOR’S PREGNANCY.
INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT.
• Amends California Constitution to prohibit abortion for unemancipated minor until 48 hours after
physician notifies minor’s parent or legal guardian, except in medical emergency or with parental
waiver.
• Permits minor to obtain court order waiving notice based on clear and convincing evidence of minor’s
maturity or best interests.
• Mandates various reporting requirements, including reports from physicians regarding abortions
performed on minors.
• Authorizes monetary damages against physicians for violation.
• Requires minor’s consent to abortion, with certain exceptions.
• Permits judicial relief if minor’s consent coerced.

Summary of Legislative Analyst’s Estimate of Net State and Local Government Fiscal Impact:
• Potential unknown net state costs of several million dollars annually for health and social services
programs, court administration, and state health agency administration combined.

85

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst

BACKGROUND

PROPOSAL

In 1953, a state law was enacted that allowed
minors to receive, without parental consent or
notification, the same types of medical care for
a pregnancy that are available to an adult. Based
on this law and later legal developments related
to abortion, minors were able to obtain abortions
without parental consent or notification.

Notification Requirements

In 1987, the Legislature amended this law
to require minors to obtain the consent of either
a parent or a court before obtaining an abortion.
However, due to legal challenges, the law was never
implemented, and the California Supreme Court
ultimately struck it down in 1997. Consequently,
minors in the state currently receive abortion
services to the same extent as adults. This includes
minors in various state health care programs, such
as the Medi-Cal health care program for lowincome individuals.
54 | Title and Summary/Analysis

This proposition amends the California
Constitution to require, with certain exceptions,
a physician (or his or her representative) to notify
the parent or legal guardian of a pregnant minor
at least 48 hours before performing an abortion
involving that minor. (This measure does not
require a physician or a minor to obtain the consent
of a parent or guardian.) This measure applies only
to cases involving an “unemancipated” minor. The
proposition identifies an unemancipated minor as
being a female under the age of 18 who has not
entered into a valid marriage, is not on active duty
in the armed services of the United States, and
has not been declared free from her parents’ or
guardians’ custody and control under state law.
A physician would provide the required
notification in either of the following two ways:

WAITING PERIOD AND PARENTAL NOTIFICATION BEFORE prop
TERMINATION OF MINOR’S PREGNANCY.
INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT.

85

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

Personal Written Notification. Written notice
could be provided to the parent or guardian
personally—for example, when a parent
accompanied the minor to an office examination.
Mail Notification. A parent or guardian could be
sent a written notice by certified mail so long as a
return receipt was requested by the physician and
delivery of the notice was restricted to the parent
or guardian who must be notified. An additional
copy of the written notice would have to be sent
at the same time to the parent or guardian by firstclass mail. Under this method, notification would
be presumed to have occurred as of noon on the
second day after the written notice was mailed.

Exceptions to Notification Requirements
The measure provides the following exceptions
to the notification requirements:
Medical Emergencies. The notification
requirements would not apply if the physician
certifies in the minor’s medical record that the
abortion is necessary to prevent the mother’s
death or that a delay would “create serious risk
of substantial and irreversible impairment of a
major bodily function.”
Waivers Approved by Parent or Guardian.
A minor’s parent or guardian could waive the
notification requirements and the waiting period by
completing and signing a written waiver form for
the physician. The parent or guardian must specify
on this form that the waiver would be valid either
(1) for 30 days, (2) until a specified date, or (3)
until the minor’s 18th birthday. The form would
need to be notarized unless the parent or guardian
delivered it personally to the physician.
Waivers Approved by Courts. The pregnant
minor could ask a juvenile court to waive the

For text of Proposition 85 see page 145.

notification requirements. A court could do so if it
finds that the minor is sufficiently mature and wellinformed to decide whether to have an abortion or
that notification would not be in the minor’s best
interest. If the waiver request is denied, the minor
could appeal that decision to an appellate court.
A minor seeking a waiver would not have to
pay court fees, would be appointed a temporary
guardian and provided other assistance in the case
by the court, and would be entitled to an attorney
appointed by the court. The identity of the minor
would be kept confidential. The court would
generally have to hear and issue a ruling within
three business days of receiving the waiver request.
The appellate court would generally have to hear
and decide any appeal within four business days.
The proposition also requires that, in any case
in which the court finds evidence of physical,
sexual, or emotional abuse, the court must refer the
evidence to the county child protection agency.

State Reporting Requirements
Physicians are required by this proposition to file
a form reporting certain information to the state
Department of Health Services (DHS) within one
month after performing an abortion on a minor. The
DHS form would include the date and facility where
the abortion was performed, the minor’s month and
year of birth, and certain other information about
the minor and the circumstances under which the
abortion was performed. The forms that physicians
would file would not identify the minor or any
parent or guardian by name. Based on these forms,
DHS would compile certain statistical information
relating to abortions performed on minors in an
annual report that would be available to the public.
The courts are required by the measure to report
annually to the state Judicial Council the number
Analysis | 55

85

prop WAITING PERIOD AND PARENTAL NOTIFICATION BEFORE
OF MINOR’S PREGNANCY.
85 TERMINATION
INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT.
Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

of petitions filed and granted or denied. The reports
would be publicly available. The measure also
requires the Judicial Council to prescribe a manner
of reporting that ensures the confidentiality of any
minor who files a petition.

Penalties
Any person who performs an abortion on a minor
and who fails to comply with the provisions of the
measure would be liable for damages in a civil action
brought by the minor, her legal representative, or by
a parent or guardian wrongfully denied notification.
Any person, other than the minor or her physician,
who knowingly provides false information that
notice of an abortion has been provided to a parent
or guardian would be guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine.

Relief From Coercion

85

The measure allows a minor to seek help from
the juvenile court if anyone attempts to coerce her
to have an abortion. A court would be required to
consider such cases quickly and could take whatever
action it found necessary to prevent coercion.

FISCAL EFFECTS
The fiscal effects of this measure on state
government would depend mainly upon how these
new requirements affect the behavior of minors
regarding abortion and childbearing. Studies of
similar laws in other states suggest that the effect of
this measure on the birthrate for California minors
would be limited, if any. If it were to increase the
birthrate for California minors, the net cost to the
state would probably not exceed several million
dollars annually for health and social services
programs, the courts, and state administration
combined. We discuss the potential major fiscal
effects of the measure below.
56 | Analysis

Savings and Costs for State Health Care
Programs
Studies of other states with laws similar to the one
proposed in this measure suggest that it could result
in a reduction in the number of abortions obtained
by minors within California. This reduction in
abortions performed in California might be offset
to an unknown extent by an increase in the number
of out-of-state abortions obtained by California
minors. Some minors might also avoid pregnancy
as a result of this measure, further reducing the
number of abortions for this group. If, for either
reason, this proposition reduces the overall number
of minors obtaining abortions in California, it is
also likely that fewer abortions would be performed
under the Medi-Cal Program and other state health
care programs that provide medical services for
minors. This would result in unknown state savings
for these programs.
This measure could also result in some unknown
additional costs for state health care programs. If
this measure results in a decrease in minors’
abortions and an increase in the birthrate of children
in low-income families eligible for publicly funded
health care, the state would incur additional costs.
These could include costs for medical services
provided during pregnancy, deliveries, and followup care.
The net fiscal effect, if any, of these or other
related cost and savings factors would probably
not exceed costs of a few million dollars annually
to the state. These costs would not be significant
compared to total state spending for programs
that provide health care services. The Medi-Cal
Program alone is estimated to cost the state $13.8
billion in 2006–07.

WAITING PERIOD AND PARENTAL NOTIFICATION BEFORE prop
TERMINATION OF MINOR’S PREGNANCY.
INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT.

85

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

State Health Agency Administrative Costs

Social Services Program Costs

The DHS would incur first-year state costs of
up to $350,000 to develop the new forms needed
to implement this measure, establish the physician
reporting system, and prepare the initial annual
report containing statistical information on
abortions obtained by minors. The ongoing state
costs for DHS to implement this measure could be
as much as $150,000 annually.

If this measure discourages some minors from
obtaining abortions and increases the birthrate
among low-income minors, expenditures for cash
assistance and services to needy families would
increase under the California Work Opportunity
and Responsibility to Kids (CalWORKs) program.
The magnitude of these costs, if any, would
probably not exceed a few million dollars annually.
The CalWORKs program is supported with both
state and federal funds, but because all CalWORKs
federal funds are capped, these additional costs
would probably be borne by the state. These costs
would not be significant compared to total state
spending for CalWORKs, which is estimated to
cost about $5 billion in state and federal funds in
2006–07. Under these circumstances, there could
also be a minor increase in child welfare and foster
care costs for the state and counties.

Juvenile and Appellate Court Administrative
Costs
The measure would result in increased state costs
for the courts, primarily as a result of the provisions
allowing minors to request a court waiver of the
notification requirements. The magnitude of these
costs is unknown, but could reach several million
dollars annually, depending primarily on the
number of minors that sought waivers. These costs
would not be significant compared to total state
expenditures for the courts, which are estimated to
be $2 billion in 2006–07.

For text of Proposition 85 see page 145.

Analysis | 57

85

Prop WAITING PERIOD AND PARENTAL NOTIFICATION BEFORE
OF MINOR’S PREGNANCY.
85 TERMINATION
INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT.

ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 85

85

IN CALIFORNIA, a daughter under 18 can’t get aspirin
from the school nurse, get a flu shot, or have a tooth pulled
without a parent knowing.
BUT, UNBELIEVABLY, surgical or chemical abortions
can be secretly performed on minor girls—even 12-yearolds—without parents’ knowledge.
PARENTS are then not prepared to help young daughters
with the serious physical, emotional, or psychological
complications which may result from an abortion or to protect
their daughters from further sexual abuse, exploitation, and
pregnancies.
A study of over 46,000 pregnancies of SCHOOL-AGE GIRLS
in California found that over two-thirds were impregnated by
ADULT MEN whose mean age was 22.6 years.
Investigations have shown that secret abortions on minors
in California are RARELY REPORTED to child protective
services although these pregnancies are evidence of statutory
rape and sexual abuse. This leaves these girls vulnerable to
further SEXUAL ABUSE, RAPES, pregnancies, abortions,
and sexually transmitted diseases.
That’s why more than ONE MILLION SIGNATURES
were submitted to allow Californians to vote on the “Parents’
Right to Know and Child Protection” / Proposition 85.
PROP. 85 will require that doctors notify a parent or
guardian at least 48 hours before performing abortions on
minor daughters.
PARENTS AND DAUGHTERS in more than 30 other
states have benefited for years from laws like Prop. 85. Many
times, after such laws pass, there have been substantial
reductions in pregnancies and abortions among minors.
When parents are involved and minors cannot anticipate
secret access to free abortions they more often avoid the reckless
behavior which leads to pregnancies. Older men, including
Internet predators, are deterred from impregnating minors when
secret abortions are not available to conceal their crimes.

If she chooses, a minor may petition juvenile court
to permit an abortion without notifying a parent. She can
request a lawyer to help her. If the evidence shows she is
mature enough to decide for herself or that notifying a parent
is not in her best interests, the judge will grant her petition.
The proceedings must be confidential, prompt, and free. She
may also seek help from juvenile court if she is being coerced
by anyone to consent to an abortion.
POLLS SHOW most people support parental notification
laws. They know that a minor girl—pregnant, scared, and
possibly abandoned or pressured by an older boyfriend—
NEEDS the advice and support of a parent.
PARENTS have invested more attention and love in raising
their daughter, know her personal and medical history better,
and care more about her future than STRANGERS employed
by abortion clinics PROFITING from performing many
abortions on minors.
A minor still has a legal right to obtain or refuse an abortion,
but a parent can help her understand all options, obtain
competent care, and provide medical records and history.
An informed parent can also get PROMPT CARE
for hemorrhage, infections, and other possibly fatal
complications.
VOTE “YES” on PROPOSITION 85 TO ALLOW
PARENTS TO CARE FOR AND PROTECT THEIR MINOR
DAUGHTERS’ WELL-BEING, HEALTH, and SAFETY!
www.YESon85.net
WILLIAM P. CLARK, California Supreme Court Justice (Ret.)
MARY L. DAVENPORT, M.D., Fellow
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
PROFESSOR JOSEPH R. ZANGA, M.D., FAAP, Past President
American Academy of Pediatrics

REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 85
NO LAW CAN FORCE FAMILIES TO COMMUNICATE.
Of course, parents rightfully want to be involved in their
teenagers’ lives, but in the REAL WORLD, some teenagers
live in dangerous homes. Some parents are violent or sexually
abuse their daughters.
IN THE REAL WORLD, Proposition 85:
• WON’T STOP CHILD PREDATORS. Backers are
exploiting our fear of predators to advance their own
political agenda.
• WON’T REDUCE TEEN PREGNANCY.
• PUTS TEENS AT RISK. Scared, pregnant teens from
abusive families won’t go to court . . . but they may resort
to dangerous back-alley abortions—or even consider suicide.
• MEANS DANGEROUS DELAYS IN CRITICAL
MEDICAL CARE. The New England Journal of
Medicine reported that, after a law like this took effect,
some pregnant teens waited months to seek care, getting
riskier second trimester abortions.
The California Supreme Court found “overwhelming”
evidence that similar laws in other states cause real harm to
teenagers and families.
Don’t be misled.
58 | Arguments

For ninety years, Planned Parenthood has been a trusted
provider of quality healthcare. Caring staff counsel pregnant
teens to talk to parents—and most do.
Planned Parenthood and other family planning clinics
COMPLY WITH ALL CALIFORNIA LAWS ON CHILD
ABUSE REPORTING. To charge NOW that they protect
criminals is ridiculous. DHHS’s Office of Inspector
General’s recent investigation didn’t fi nd evidence of a
single reporting violation.
The San Jose Mercury News says Proposition 85 is “PART
OF A LARGER STRATEGY TO CHIP AWAY AT LEGALIZED
ABORTION IN THE UNITED STATES.”
Prop. 85 threatens teens . . . and a whole lot more.
VOTE NO.
DONNA W. CHIPPS, Executive Vice President
League of Women Voters of California
BO GREAVES, M.D., President
California Academy of Family Physicians
JEANNE A. CONRY, M.D., Vice Chair
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
District IX California

Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.

WAITING PERIOD AND PARENTAL NOTIFICATION BEFORE Prop
TERMINATION OF MINOR’S PREGNANCY.
Initiative Constitutional Amendment.

85

ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 85
DOCTORS AND NURSES, including the California
Medical Association, the California Nurses Association,
American Academy of Pediatrics-California District,
California Academy of Family Physicians, and the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists-District IX
California, STRONGLY OPPOSE PROPOSITION 85.
They understand that while PARENTS RIGHTFULLY
WANT TO BE INVOLVED IN THEIR TEENAGERS’
LIVES, in the real world, SOME California TEENAGERS
COME FROM HOMES where they can’t talk to their parents,
where there is violence, or WHERE A FAMILY MEMBER
HAS SEXUALLY ABUSED THEM.
THESE TEENS CAN’T GO TO THEIR PARENTS.
They fear being kicked out of their homes, beaten, or worse.
Proposition 85 forces these teens to delay critical medical
care or turn to self-induced or illegal back-alley abortions.
Some will go across the border; some will suffer serious
injuries or even consider suicide.
PROPOSITION 85 PUTS THE HEALTH AND SAFETY
OF TEENAGERS AT RISK.
No law can mandate good family communication. The
real answer to teen pregnancy and abortion is strong, caring
families and comprehensive sex education, including abstinence.
But sadly, not all California teens live in homes with strong,
caring families.
For OUR MOST VULNERABLE TEENAGERS—those
who most need protection—PROPOSITION 85 PUTS THEM
IN HARM’S WAY OR FORCES THEM TO GO TO COURT.
FORCING A SCARED, PREGNANT TEENAGER
who can’t go to her parents INTO CALIFORNIA’S
OVERCROWDED COURT SYSTEM WON’T WORK—
AND COULD CAUSE TEENS MORE HARM. Courts are
already backlogged, there’s a lot of red tape, and they are hard
to navigate, even for adults.
Think about it. The teen is scared, pregnant, her family might
be abusive. SHE DOESN’T NEED A JUDGE. SHE NEEDS A
COUNSELOR AND GOOD MEDICAL CARE—WITHOUT
DELAY.

Proposition 85’s new bureaucratic rules WON’T GUARANTEE
that parents are notified. Who will sign for the mail? What happens
when the mail is delayed, or the parents aren’t home, or the teen
intercepts the letter?
The real answer to teen pregnancy is prevention and
caring families—NOT NEW LAWS THAT ENDANGER
OUR DAUGHTERS.
AND PROPOSITION 85 IS NOT ABOUT PROTECTING
TEENS FROM OLDER MEN AND SEXUAL PREDATORS.
Clinics already provide counseling about responsible
behavior and report illegal activities.
Proposition 85 won’t reduce teen pregnancy rates,
can’t force families to communicate, is complicated and
unworkable . . . and is not about predators—BUT IT WILL
PUT GENERATIONS OF CALIFORNIA’S TEENAGERS
AT RISK.
WE ALL MUST CARE enough about Proposition 85 to
VOTE NO because DEFEATING Prop. 85 is about KEEPING
OUR DAUGHTERS SAFE and PROTECTING THE RIGHT TO
CHOOSE.
SUPPORTERS of Proposition 85—including the Traditional
Values Coalition, Evangelicals for Social Action, and Right
to Life of Central California—ARE THE SAME PEOPLE
WHO WANT TO OVERTURN ROE v. WADE and BAN
ALL ABORTIONS. Despite what they say, Proposition 85
ISN’T ABOUT PARENTAL RIGHTS; IT’S ABOUT THEIR
POLITICAL AGENDA.
Join PARENTS, DOCTORS, NURSES, PLANNED
PARENTHOOD, and THE LEAGUE OF WOMEN
VOTERS OF CALIFORNIA and VOTE NO on 85. For more
information about REAL TEEN SAFETY, VISIT OUR
WEBSITE, www.noon85.com. VOTE NO ON PROP. 85.
JACK LEWIN, M.D., CEO, California Medical Association
ROBERT L. BLACK, M.D.
American Academy of Pediatrics, California District
KATHY KNEER, CEO
Planned Parenthood Affiliates of California

REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 85
When parents learn their daughter is pregnant, ALMOST
ALL RESPOND WITH LOVE AND SUPPORT.
PROPOSITION 85 OFFERS CLEAR BENEFITS TO
YOUNG GIRLS:
• The parent can assist her daughter in selecting a doctor. Many
abortion clinics employ doctors who have been disciplined
by the medical board for INCOMPETENCE, NEGLIGENCE,
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS, OR SEXUAL MISCONDUCT.
Many have been cited by health officials for UNSAFE
CONDITIONS.
• An informed parent can respond quickly to post-abortion
complications. Abortion complications can result in
permanent injury, even death. Teens who have secret
abortions often delay seeking treatment. PARENTS WHO
DON’T KNOW, CAN’T HELP.
• Parents who learn their daughters are victims of sexual
assaults can intervene to protect them. Many abortion
providers CHOOSE NOT TO REPORT SEXUAL ABUSE,
abandoning these girls to FURTHER SEXUAL ABUSE.
www.ChildPredators.com
In the rare case of familial abuse, a court will permit a
minor to obtain an abortion without notifying a parent—then
notify child protective services so she can be helped, NOT

LEFT VULNERABLE TO FURTHER HARM.
A parent of two young teenage daughters, GOVERNOR
ARNOLD SCHWARZENEGGER said it would be
“. . . THE ULTIMATE OF BEING OUTRAGED . . .” if
someone took his daughter for a secret abortion.
OVER THIRTY STATES already have laws like
PROPOSITION 85, and THEIR EXPERIENCE SHOWS
THESE LAWS REDUCE MINORS’ PREGNANCY AND
ABORTION RATES WITHOUT DANGER AND HARM TO
MINORS.
Currently, the state PAYS FOR SECRET ABORTIONS
FOR MINOR GIRLS. PUT PARENTS IN CHARGE, NOT
THE GOVERNMENT!
VOTE “YES” on PROPOSITION 85! PROTECT OUR
DAUGHTERS! See: www.YESon85.net

PROFESSOR TERESA STANTON COLLETT, J.D.
National Authority on Parental Notification and
Involvement Laws
JANE E. ANDERSON, M.D., FAAP, Clinical Professor of
Pediatrics
PROFESSOR JOSEPH R. ZANGA, M.D., FAAP, Past President
American Academy of Pediatrics
Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.
Arguments | 59

85

PROPOSITION

86

TAX ON CIGARETTES.
INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT AND STATUTE.

Official Title and Summary

Prepared by the Attorney General

TAX ON CIGARETTES.
INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT AND STATUTE.
• Imposes additional 13 cent tax on each cigarette distributed ($2.60 per pack), and indirectly increases tax on
other tobacco products.
• Provides funding to qualified hospitals for emergency services, nursing education and health insurance to
eligible children.
• Revenue also allocated to specified purposes including tobacco-use-prevention programs, enforcement of
tobacco-related laws, and research, prevention, treatment of various conditions including cancers (breast,
cervical, prostate, colorectal), heart disease, stroke, asthma and obesity.
• Exempts recipient hospitals from antitrust laws in certain circumstances.
• Revenue excluded from appropriation limits and minimum education funding (Proposition 98) calculations.

Summary of Legislative Analyst’s Estimate of Net State and Local Government Fiscal Impact:

86

• Increase in new state tobacco excise tax revenues of about $2.1 billion annually by 2007–08, declining slightly
annually thereafter. Those revenues would be spent for various health programs, children’s health coverage, and
tobacco-related programs.
• Unknown net state costs potentially exceeding $100 million annually after a few years due to provisions
simplifying state health program enrollment rules and creating a new pilot program for children’s health
coverage.
• Unknown, but potentially significant, savings to the state Medi-Cal Program and counties from a shift of
children from other health care coverage to the Healthy Families Program (HFP); potential state costs that could
be significant in the long term for ongoing support of expanded HFP enrollment.
• Unknown, but potentially significant, savings in state and local government public health care costs over time
due to various factors, including an expected reduction in consumption of tobacco products.
Analysis by the Legislative Analyst

BACKGROUND
Tobacco Taxes
Current state law imposes certain taxes directly on
cigarettes and other tobacco products that are known
as excise taxes. Excise taxes are taxes collected on
selected goods or services. Currently, the excise taxes
total 87 cents per pack of cigarettes (with a similar
tax on other types of tobacco products). The total tax
of 87 cents per pack consists of:
• 50 cents to support early childhood development
programs, enacted by the voters as Proposition 10
in 1998.
60 | Title and Summary/Analysis

• 25 cents to support tobacco education and
prevention efforts, tobacco-related disease research
programs, health care services for low-income
uninsured persons, and environmental protection
and recreational programs, enacted by the voters
as Proposition 99 in 1988.
• 10 cents for the state General Fund.
• 2 cents to support research related to breast cancer
and breast cancer screening programs for uninsured
women.
Current taxes on cigarettes and other tobacco
products are estimated to raise about $1.1 billion in
2006–07.

TAX ON CIGARETTES. prop
INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT AND STATUTE.

86

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

Children’s Health Care Coverage
Medi-Cal. The Medi-Cal Program (the federal
Medicaid Program in California) provides health care
services to low-income persons, including eligible
children (depending on the age of the child). Families
with incomes up to 133 percent of the federal poverty
level (FPL) (about $27,000 per year for a family of
four) are generally eligible for coverage. The program
is administered by the state Department of Health
Services (DHS).
Under the Medicaid Program, matching federal
funds are available for the support of comprehensive
medical services for United States citizens and to
“qualified aliens”—that is, immigrants who are
permanent residents, refugees, or a member of
certain other groups granted the legal right to remain
in the United States. Federal matching funds are
also available for nonqualified aliens, but only for
emergency medical services.
The Medi-Cal Program currently serves about 3.2
million adults and 3.2 million children.
Healthy Families. The Healthy Families Program
(HFP) offers health insurance to eligible children
in families who generally have incomes below 250
percent of FPL (about $50,000 per year for a family
of four) who do not qualify for Medi-Cal. (Children in
some families with higher incomes are also eligible.)
Funding is generally on a two-to-one federal/state
matching basis. Children in HFP must be eligible
United States citizens or qualified aliens. The HFP is
administered by the Managed Risk Medical Insurance
Board (MRMIB).
The HFP provides medical coverage for about
781,000 children.
Local Health Coverage Programs. The County
Health Initiative Matching (CHIM) Fund program,
which is administered by MRMIB and counties,
provides health coverage for children in families with
an income between 250 percent and 300 percent of
FPL (between $50,000 and $60,000 per year for a
family of four). The CHIM program relies on county
funds as the match required to draw down federal

For text of Proposition 86 see page 147.

funds to pay for this health coverage. This program
has a caseload of about 3,000 children.
In addition to the CHIM program, some counties
have established their own health coverage programs
for children that are ineligible for Medi-Cal or
HFP. These programs are primarily supported with
local funding. These programs serve about 69,000
children.

PROPOSAL
This measure increases excise taxes on cigarettes
(and, as discussed below, indirectly on other tobacco
products) to provide funding for hospitals for
emergency services as well as programs to increase
access to health insurance for children, expand
nursing education, support various new and existing
health and education activities, curb tobacco use
and regulate tobacco sales. Major provisions of the
measure are described below.

New State Tobacco Tax Revenues
A pack of cigarettes now costs roughly $4.00
in California, including 87 cents in excise taxes.
This measure increases the existing excise
tax on cigarettes by $2.60 per pack effective
January 2007. Existing state law requires the Board
of Equalization (BOE) to increase taxes on other
tobacco products—such as loose tobacco and
snuff—in an amount equivalent to any increase in
the tax on cigarettes. Thus, this measure would also
result in a comparable increase in the excise tax on
other tobacco products. All of the additional tobacco
revenues (including those on other tobacco products)
would be used to support various new and existing
programs specified in this measure.

How Additional Tobacco Revenues Would Be
Spent
Revenues from the excise tax increase would
generally be deposited in a new fund called the
Tobacco Tax of 2006 Trust Fund and would be
allocated for various specified purposes, as shown in
Figure 1 later in this analysis.
Analysis | 61

86

prop TAX ON CIGARETTES.

86 INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT AND STATUTE.
Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

Backfill of Proposition 10 Programs. An
unspecified amount of the additional excise tax
revenues would be used to fully backfill Proposition
10 programs for early childhood development for a
loss of funding that would result from the enactment
of the new tax measure. This is because the tax
increases contained in this measure are (1) likely
to result in reduced sales of tobacco products and
(2) could result in more sales of tobacco products
for which taxes would not be collected, such as for
smuggled products and out-of-state sales. This, in
turn, would reduce the amount of revenues collected
through the excise taxes imposed under Proposition
10. The amount of backfill payments needed to offset
any loss of funding for the Proposition 10 program
would be determined by BOE.
Health Treatment and Services Account. Under
the measure, 52.75 percent of the funds that remain
after providing the Proposition 10 backfill funding
would be allocated to a Health Treatment and Services
Account. This funding would be used for the purposes
outlined below:

86

• Hospital Funding. Nearly three-fourths of the
funds in this account would be allocated to hospitals
to pay their unreimbursed costs for emergency
services and to improve or expand emergency
services, facilities, or equipment. Allocations
would be based largely on the number of persons
that hospitals treat in their emergency departments
and their costs for providing health care for
patients who are poor. Private hospitals and certain
public hospitals, including those licensed to the
University of California (UC), would be eligible to
receive funding. Hospitals licensed to other state
agencies or the federal government would not be
eligible for funding.
• Nursing Education Programs. These funds would
be used to expand nursing education programs
in UC, California State University, community
college, and privately operated nursing education
programs.
62 | Analysis

• Additional Allocations. Funding would be
allocated for the support of nonprofit community
clinics; to help pay for uncompensated health care
for uninsured persons provided by physicians; for
college loan repayments to encourage physicians
to provide medical services to low-income persons
in communities with insufficient physicians; to
provide prostate cancer treatment services; and for
services to assist individuals to quit smoking.
Health Maintenance and Disease Prevention
Account. Under the measure, 42.25 percent of the
funds that remained after providing the Proposition 10
backfill funding would be allocated to a Health
Maintenance and Disease Prevention Account. This
funding would be used for the purposes outlined below:
• Children’s Health Coverage Expansion. Almost
one-half of these funds would be allocated to
expand the HFP to provide health coverage to
include (1) children from families with incomes
between 250 percent and 300 percent of the FPL
and (2) children from families with incomes up
to 300 percent of the FPL who are undocumented
immigrants or legal immigrants not now eligible
for HFP. This measure requires MRMIB and
DHS to simplify the procedures for enrolling and
keeping children in HFP and Medi-Cal coverage
and creates a pilot project to provide coverage for
uninsured children in families with incomes above
300 percent of the FPL.
• Tobacco-Related Programs. These funds would
support media advertising and public relations
campaigns, grants to local health departments and
other local organizations, and education programs
for school children to prevent and reduce smoking.
Funding would also go to state and local agencies
for enforcing laws and court settlements which
regulate and tax the sale of tobacco products.
Also, some funds would be used to evaluate the
effectiveness of these tobacco control programs.
• Health and Education Programs. Part of these
funds would be set aside for various new or

TAX ON CIGARETTES. prop
INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT AND STATUTE.

86

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

existing health programs related to certain diseases
or conditions, including colorectal, breast, and
cervical cancer; heart disease and stroke; obesity;
and asthma.
Health and Disease Research Account. Under
the measure, 5 percent of the funds that remained
after providing the backfill funding discussed above
would be allocated to a Health and Disease Research
Account. This funding would be used to support
medical research relating to cancer in general and
breast and lung cancer in particular. In addition, it
would support research into tobacco-related diseases,
as well as the effectiveness of tobacco control efforts.
Part of these funds would be used to support a
statewide cancer registry, a state program that collects
data on cancer cases.

Other Major Provisions
In addition to the provisions that raise tobacco
excise taxes and spend these same revenues, this
measure contains a number of other significant
provisions, which are described below.
Existing Funding for Physician Payments
Continued. In recent years, the state has spent almost
$25 million per year in Proposition 99 funds for
allocations to counties to reimburse physicians for
uncompensated medical care for persons who are
poor. This measure requires that this same level of
Proposition 99 funds be allocated annually in the
future for this purpose.
Expenditure Rules. The funds allocated under
this measure would not be appropriated through the
annual state budget act and thus would not be subject
to change by actions of the Legislature and Governor.
The additional revenues would generally have to be
used for the services noted above and could not take
the place of existing state or local spending. The state
and counties could not borrow these new revenues to
use for other purposes, but they could be used to draw
down additional federal funds. Contracts to implement

For text of Proposition 86 see page 147.

some of the new programs funded by this measure
would be exempted from state contracting rules for the
first five years.
Oversight Provisions. This measure requires DHS
to prepare an annual report describing the programs
that received additional excise tax funding and how
that funding was used. This information would be
made available to the public by DHS on its Web site.
Programs receiving these funds would be subject to
audit. New state committees would be established to
oversee the expansion of children’s health coverage
and antiobesity programs.
Hospital Charges and Bill Collections. Hospitals
that are allocated funds under this measure for
emergency and trauma care services would be subject
to limits on what they could charge to certain patients
in families with incomes at or below 350 percent of
the FPL. These hospitals would also have to adopt
written policies on their bill collection practices and,
under certain circumstances, could not send unpaid
bills to collection agencies, garnish wages, or place
liens on the homes of patients as a means of collecting
unpaid hospital bills.
Coordination of Medical Services by Hospitals.
Subject to the approval of certain local officials,
hospitals receiving funding under this measure would
be allowed to coordinate certain medical services,
including emergency services, with other hospitals.
For example, hospitals would be permitted to jointly
share the costs of ensuring the availability of oncall physicians who provide emergency services.
The measure seeks to exempt such coordination of
emergency services from antitrust laws that might
limit or prohibit such coordination efforts.

FISCAL EFFECTS
This measure would have a number of fiscal effects
on state and local governments. The major fiscal
effects we have identified are discussed below.

Analysis | 63

86

prop TAX ON CIGARETTES.

86 INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT AND STATUTE.
Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

Impacts on State and Local Revenues
Revenues Affected by Consumer Response. Our
revenue estimates assume that the excise tax increase
of $2.60 per pack is passed along to consumers by
the distributors of tobacco products who actually pay
the excise tax. In other words, we assume that the
prices of tobacco products would be raised to include
the excise tax increase. This would result in various
consumer responses. The price increase is likely to
result in consumers reducing the quantity of taxable
tobacco products that they purchase. Consumers
could also shift their purchases so that taxes would
not be collected on tobacco products, such as
through Internet purchases or purchases of smuggled
products.

86

The magnitude of these consumer responses is
uncertain given the size of the proposed tax increase.
There is substantial evidence regarding the response
of consumers to small and moderate tax increases
on tobacco products in terms of reduced tobacco
consumption. As a result, for small-to-moderate
increases in price, the revenue impacts can be estimated
with a reasonable degree of confidence. However,
the increase in taxes proposed in this measure is
substantially greater than that experienced previously.
As a result, we believe that revenue estimates based
on traditional assumptions regarding this consumer
response would likely be overstated. Therefore, our
revenue estimates below assume a greater consumer
response in terms of reduced tobacco consumption to
this tax increase than has traditionally been the case.
These estimates are subject to uncertainty, however,
given a variety of factors, including the large tax
changes involved.
Revenues From Tax Increase on Tobacco
Products. We estimate that the increase in excise
taxes would raise about $1.2 billion in 2006–07 (onehalf year effect from January through June 2007). It
would raise about $2.1 billion in 2007–08 (first fullyear impact). This excise tax increase would raise
slightly declining amounts of revenues thereafter.
64 | Analysis

Effects on State General Fund Revenues. The
measure’s increase in the excise tax would have
offsetting effects on state General Fund revenues.
On the one hand, the higher price and the ensuing
decline in consumption of tobacco products would
reduce state General Fund revenues from the existing
excise taxes. On the other hand, the state’s General
Fund sales tax revenues would increase because the
sales tax is based on the price of the tobacco product
plus the excise tax. The decreases in revenues would
approximately equal the increases in revenues.
Effects on Local Revenues. Local governments
would likely experience an annual increase in sales
tax revenues of as much as $10 million.
Effects on Existing Tobacco Excise Tax Revenues.
The decline in consumption of tobacco products
caused by this measure would similarly reduce the
excise tax revenues that would be generated for
Proposition 99 and 10 programs and for the Breast
Cancer Fund. We estimate that the initial annual
revenue losses are likely to be about $180 million for
Proposition 10, about $90 million for Proposition 99,
and less than $10 million for the Breast Cancer Fund.
However, these losses would be more than offset in
most cases by additional tax revenues generated by
this measure, as discussed below.

Impacts of New Programs on State and Local
Expenditures
State and local government expenditures for the
administration and operation of various programs
supported through this measure would generally
increase in line with the proposed increase in excise
tax revenues. Figure 1 (see next page) shows the
main purpose of the accounts established by the
initiative, the percentage of funds allocated to each
purpose, and our estimate of the funding that would
be available for each account in the first full year
of tax collection. These allocations would probably
decline in subsequent years as excise tax revenues
also declined, potentially resulting in a corresponding

TAX ON CIGARETTES. prop
INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT AND STATUTE.

86

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)
FIGURE 1
How Tobacco Tax Funds Would Be Allocateda
Purpose

Allocation

Estimate of
2007–08 Funding
(Full Year in Millions)

Backfill of California Children and Families First Trust
Fund—Proposition 10

Unspecified amount determined
by Board of Equalization

$180

Health Treatment and Services Account

52.75 percent of remaining funds

Hospital emergency and trauma care
Nursing education programs
Nonprofit community clinics
California Healthcare for Indigents Program—
reimbursement of emergency care physicians
Tobacco cessation services
Prostate cancer treatment
Rural Health Services Program—reimbursement of
emergency care physicians
College loan repayment program to encourage
physicians to serve low-income areas lacking physicians

74.50 percent of account
9.00 percent
5.75 percent
5.75 percent

Health Maintenance and Disease Prevention Account

42.25 percent of remaining funds

$810

Children’s health coverage
Heart disease and stroke program
Breast and cervical cancer program
Obesity, diabetes, and chronic diseases programs
Tobacco control media campaign
Tobacco control competitive grants program
Local health department tobacco prevention program
Asthma program
Colorectal cancer program
Tobacco prevention education programs
Tobacco control enforcement activities
Evaluation of tobacco control programs

45.50 percent of account
8.50 percent
8.00 percent
7.75 percent
6.75 percent
4.50 percent
4.25 percent
4.25 percent
4.25 percent
3.50 percent
2.25 percent
0.50 percent

$367
69
65
63
55
36
34
34
34
28
18
4

Health and Disease Research Account

5.00 percent of remaining funds

$95

Tobacco control research
Breast cancer research
Cancer research
Cancer registry
Lung cancer research

34.00 percent of account
25.75 percent
14.75 percent
14.50 percent
11.00 percent

$32
24
14
14
10

$756
91
58
58

1.75 percent
1.75 percent
0.75 percent

18
18
8

0.75 percent

8

Total Allocations
a

$1,015

$2,100

Because the overall revenues from the tobacco tax increase are subject to uncertainty, the actual allocations to
programs could be greater or less than the amounts shown here.
Totals may not add due to rounding.

For text of Proposition 86 see page 147.

Analysis | 65

86

prop TAX ON CIGARETTES.

86 INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT AND STATUTE.
Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

decrease in state and local expenditures for these new
programs.
The state administrative costs associated with the
tax provisions of this measure would be minor.

Impacts on Other Tobacco Tax-Funded
Programs
This measure would have a number of significant
fiscal effects on the three existing programs
supported by tobacco excise taxes—Proposition 99
(which supports various health and public resources
programs), Proposition 10 (which supports early
childhood development programs), and the Breast
Cancer Fund (which supports breast and cervical
cancer screening and breast cancer research
programs).

86

Proposition 99. This measure does not directly
backfill any Proposition 99 accounts for the loss of
revenues that would be likely to occur as a result of
the excise tax increase proposed in this measure.
Specifically, we estimate that this measure would
initially result in an annual funding reduction of
about $5 million for the public resources account and
initially almost $25 million for an account that can be
used to support any program eligible for Proposition
99 funding.
However, while this measure would reduce
revenues for other Proposition 99 accounts, it would
also initially provide significant increases in funding
in the new accounts created under this measure for
activities comparable to those now funded through
Proposition 99. This includes health education and
tobacco research, hospital services, and physician
services. In the aggregate, these activities could
initially experience a net gain in funding of almost
$950 million if this measure were enacted.
Proposition 10. Proposition 10 would receive full
backfill funding under the terms of this measure. We
estimate that this backfill would initially amount to
about $180 million annually.

66 | Analysis

Breast Cancer Fund. No backfill funding would
be provided for the Breast Cancer Fund to offset
the loss of revenues resulting from the tax increases
proposed in this measure. However, this measure
would allocate a set portion of the new tax revenues
for breast cancer research and breast cancer early
detection services, with the result that these activities
initially would likely experience a net gain of about
$80 million annually.

Revenues and Costs From Provisions
Affecting Public Hospitals
Some of the hospital emergency services funding
provided under this measure could be allocated to
public hospitals licensed to state and local agencies,
such as those run by UC, counties, cities, and health
care districts. This and certain other provisions of the
measure could potentially result in increased revenues
and expenditures for support of these hospital
operations. The magnitude of the fiscal effects of all
of these provisions is unknown, but is likely to result
in a net financial gain for hospitals operated by state
and local government agencies up to the low hundreds
of millions of dollars annually on a statewide basis.

Fiscal Impact on State and Counties From
Children’s Coverage Provisions
Long-Term Increase in State Costs for Increased
HFP Enrollment. In the short term, the revenues
allocated by this measure to expand HFP would
probably exceed the costs to make additional children
eligible for health coverage. This would particularly
be the case in the early years as enrollment gradually
increased. Any excess revenues for expanding
children’s health coverage would be reserved to
support this same purpose in future years.
Over time, however, as the excise tax revenues
allocated for this purpose declined (for the reasons
mentioned above) and the number of children enrolled
in HFP grew, the costs of the expanded HFP could
eventually exceed the available revenues. Current
state law would permit MRMIB to limit enrollment

TAX ON CIGARETTES. prop
INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT AND STATUTE.

86

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

in the program to prevent this from occurring. If
actions were not taken to offset program costs at that
point, however, additional state financial support for
the program would be necessary. These potential
long-term state costs are unknown but could be
significant.
State and County Savings From Shift in
Children’s Coverage. This measure allows some
children now receiving health coverage in local health
coverage programs, such as CHIM, to instead be
enrolled in the expanded HFP. Also, some children
in low-income families receiving health care from
counties without local health initiatives would be
likely to become enrolled in HFP. These changes
would likely result in unknown, but potentially
significant, savings on a statewide basis to local
governments, particularly for counties.
The Medi-Cal Program could also experience
some state savings for emergency services as some
children would instead receive their coverage for
these and other services through HFP. These savings
to the state could reach the tens of millions of dollars
annually unless the state decided, as this measure
permits, to have these children continue to receive
emergency services through Medi-Cal.
Net Increase in State Costs From Pilot Projects
and Simplified Enrollment. This measure requires
MRMIB and DHS to simplify the procedures for
enrolling and keeping children in HFP and Medi-Cal
coverage. For example, among other changes, these
provisions could allow applicants to “self-certify”
their income and assets on their applications for
coverage without immediately providing employer or
tax documents to verify their financial status. From
an administrative perspective, some changes that
simplified enrollment rules would reduce state costs,
while others, such as changes in computer systems
for enrollment activities, would likely increase state
costs. As regards caseloads, these changes are likely
to increase program enrollment and, therefore, costs
for the state. This would occur because children who

For text of Proposition 86 see page 147.

are eligible for, but not enrolled in, Medi-Cal and
HFP would be signed up for medical benefits and
existing enrollees would continue to be served in
these programs.
As noted earlier, this measure also directs the state
to establish a pilot project to provide health coverage
for uninsured children in families with incomes above
300 percent of the FPL. This would also increase state
caseload costs.
The net fiscal effect of these provisions is an
increase in state costs that could exceed $100 million
annually after a few years. Some of these costs
could be paid for using the new excise tax revenues
generated under this measure.

Potential State and Local Savings on Public
Health Costs
Currently, the state and local governments incur
costs for providing (1) health care for low-income
persons and (2) health insurance coverage for state
and local government employees. Consequently,
changes in state law that affect the health of the
general populace would affect publicly funded health
care costs. Because this measure is likely to result in
a decrease in the consumption of tobacco products
which have been linked to various adverse health
effects, it would probably reduce state and local health
care costs over the long term.
Some of the health programs funded in this
measure are intended to prevent individuals from
experiencing serious health problems that could be
costly to treat. To the extent that these prevention
efforts are successful and affect publicly funded
health care programs, they are likely to reduce state
and local government health care costs over time. In
addition, the proposed expansion of these state health
programs could reduce county costs for providing
health care for adults and children in low-income
families.
The magnitude of state and local savings from these
factors is unknown but would likely be significant.
Analysis | 67

86

Prop TAX ON CIGARETTES.

86 Initiative Constitutional Amendment AND STATUTE.
ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 86

86

Smoking Kills.
Public health experts agree: Taxing tobacco will save lives.
The Tobacco Control Section of the California Department
of Health Services has issued an analysis of Proposition 86
titled “Economic and Health Effects of a State Cigarette Excise
Tax Increase in California.”
The California Department of Health Services has
determined that:
Proposition 86 Will Save Lives:
• Prevent nearly 180,000 deaths due to smoking among
California kids now under the age of 17.
• Prevent approximately 120,000 additional deaths due to
smoking among current California adult smokers who quit
smoking.
Proposition 86 Will Reduce and Prevent Smoking:
• The tax increase alone would prevent more than 700,000 kids
now under the age of 17 from becoming adult smokers.
• 120,000 high school students and 30,000 middle school
students would either quit or not start smoking.
• More than half a million smokers in California would quit
smoking.
• Californians would consume 312 million fewer packs of
cigarettes each year.
Proposition 86 Saves Money:
• Nearly $16.5 billion saved in healthcare costs.
• Increases state revenue by over $2.2 billion per year.
[See the report for yourself at www.yesprop86.com.]
That’s why Proposition 86 is supported by a broad coalition,
including:
American Cancer Society
American Heart Association
American Lung Association of California
American Academy of Pediatrics/California Chapter
The Children’s Partnership
American College of Emergency Physicians, California
Chapter

California Emergency Nurses Association
Association of California Nurse Leaders
California Hospital Association
League of United Latin American Citizens
California Black Health Network
Children Now
California Primary Care Association
Tobacco-Free Kids Action Fund
Los Angeles Chamber of Commerce
The initiative specifically raises the tax on a pack of cigarettes
by $2.60 to help fund some of California’s critical healthcare
needs, including emergency care services; health insurance for
children; nursing education; tobacco use prevention programs;
enforcement of tobacco-related laws; and research, prevention,
and treatment of serious health problems, including cancers,
heart diseases, stroke, asthma, and obesity.
Proposition 86 includes tough financial safeguards,
including annual detailed public reporting of the use of tax
funds, independent audits, limits on administrative costs, and a
strict prohibition against the Legislature raiding the trust funds
for any other government program. This means the money will
go exactly where voters intend.
This measure will save lives. With smoking-related illnesses
driving up our healthcare costs and overloading our healthcare
system, Proposition 86 will help discourage smoking and ease
some of the problems caused by preventable, smoking-related
illnesses.
SAVE LIVES. TAX TOBACCO. VOTE YES ON
PROPOSITION 86.
CAROLYN RHEE, Chair
American Cancer Society, California Division
P.K. SHAH, M.D., President
American Heart Association, Western States Affiliate
TIMOTHY A. MORRIS, M.D., Board Member
American Lung Association of California

REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 86
Helping people stop smoking and keeping kids from
starting is important. Unfortunately, less than 10% of the
$2.1 billion in new tax money goes to programs that help
smokers quit or keep kids from starting. Here’s what’s really
in the initiative:
• Huge hospital corporations are spending millions
promoting Prop. 86 because they will pocket hundreds
of millions of dollars every year. HMOs will also get
millions of dollars each year.
• Almost 40% of the $2.1 billion in new tax money
from Prop. 86 goes to hospitals—THAT’S OVER
$800 MILLION A YEAR THAT HAS VIRTUALLY
NOTHING TO DO WITH STOPPING SMOKING!
• The $2.1 billion comes from an unfair $2.60 tax increase
on each pack of cigarettes—an increase of almost 300%.
Here’s what Prop. 86 is really all about:
• Section 9 gives hospitals an exemption to antitrust laws.
• There’s nothing in Prop. 86 that limits what hospitals can
charge taxpayers for emergency services for the uninsured.
68 | Arguments

This amounts to an open taxpayer checkbook!
• There are no guarantees on how the money will be
spent.
• Under California law approved by voters (Proposition
98), approximately 40% of any new taxes are dedicated
to our schools. The huge hospital corporations don’t want
to share with our schools and kids, so they included a
CONSTITUTIONAL EXEMPTION (Section 15) so that
NONE of these funds will go to our schools.
Check it out for yourself: www.86facts.org.
Prop. 86 is really about special interests amending our
Constitution for their benefit.
No on 86.
MONICA WEISBRICH, RN, Operating Room Nurse
JAIME ROJAS, President
California Hispanic Chambers of Commerce
MALCOLM SIMPSON, Public School Teacher

Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.

TAX ON CIGARETTES. Prop
Initiative Constitutional Amendment AND STATUTE.

86

ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 86
VOTE “NO” ON PROPOSITION 86—STOP THE $2.1
BILLION TAX HIKE!
We all want to improve our healthcare system, but
Proposition 86 is the wrong solution. Prop. 86 is an unfair tax
increase supported by special interests who are amending our
Constitution to benefit themselves.
Prop. 86’s proponents say it’s about encouraging people not
to smoke, but it isn’t. It’s really a money grab by huge hospital
corporations who will reap hundreds of millions of taxpayer
dollars each year!
• Less than 10% of the tax revenues go toward helping
smokers quit or keeping kids from starting.
• The largest share—almost 40%—goes to hospitals, many
of which are funding the campaign for the new tax.
• HMOs will pocket millions from Prop. 86.
WHY ARE HUGE HOSPITAL CORPORATIONS
SPENDING MILLIONS TO PASS PROP. 86?
• Hospitals wrote Prop. 86 to give themselves an exemption
to antitrust laws, giving them legal protection to divvy up
and limit many medical services, and then raise prices
without worrying about competition.
• Prop. 86 puts no limits on what hospitals can bill
taxpayers for emergency services for the uninsured. Why
should hospitals be allowed to charge taxpayers several
times what they charge insurance companies for the same
treatment?
PROP. 86: ANOTHER LOTTERY MESS
Like the state lottery, it will be nearly impossible for voters
to know how the new taxes will be spent. Prop. 86 lists program
after state program that gets a cut of the estimated $2.1 billion
in new tax revenue.
PROP. 86: NO ACCOUNTABILITY TO TAXPAYERS
Prop. 86 throws millions of dollars at new bureaucratic
state programs without adequate legislative or governmental

oversight. There are NO GUARANTEES how the money will
actually be spent or assurances the money won’t be wasted.
PROP. 86: INCREASES OUR DEFICIT
Prop. 86 contains 38 pages of spending mandates. But
experts agree that the amount of money raised by this tobacco
tax will decline over time. Declining revenues and demands to
fund Prop. 86’s programs will only worsen our deficit. Other
important programs like education, transportation, and law
enforcement might have to be cut, or taxes raised further.
PROP. 86: INCREASES CRIME
Law enforcement groups oppose Prop. 86 because it will
increase crime and smuggling. Stolen and smuggled cigarettes
are already a big source of money for gangs and organized
crime. If Prop. 86 passes, a single truckload of stolen cigarettes
could be worth over $2 million to criminals.
PROP. 86: UNFAIR
Prop. 86 taxes smokers to pay for programs that have nothing
to do with smoking, like obesity programs. Less than 10% of
the tax revenues go toward helping smokers quit or keeping
kids from starting.
PROP. 86: LOCKED INTO OUR CONSTITUTION
Proposition 86 amends our Constitution and statutes. When
problems and abuses are discovered, it will be nearly impossible
for the Governor or the Legislature to fix them. The Constitution
should not be changed for a special interest money-grab.
Please join health professionals, law enforcement, taxpayers,
and small businesses in voting NO on Proposition 86.
LARRY McCARTHY, President
California Taxpayers’ Association
JAMES G. KNIGHT, M.D., Past President
San Diego County Medical Society
STEVEN REMIGE, President
Association for Los Angeles Deputy Sheriffs

REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 86
Make no mistake; big tobacco corporations are bankrolling
opposition to Prop. 86.
Raising cigarette taxes means fewer people will smoke—
especially kids. That hurts tobacco company profits.
They’ve seen the report by the California Department
of Health Services which says that Prop. 86 will reduce the
number of cigarettes sold in California by 312 million packs
each year.
The report also says that Prop. 86 will prevent 700,000 kids
from starting to smoke and save 300,000 lives.
Tobacco companies invest over $1 billion a year marketing
cigarettes in California. This is a market they won’t give up
without a fight.
When executives of the tobacco companies were called
before Congress and put under oath, incredibly, each and
every one of them lied by testifying that cigarettes are not
addictive.
They lied to Congress under oath and now they’re lying to
you.
Their arguments against Prop. 86 are outright distortions
and untruths.

Read Prop. 86 for yourself. You’ll see that it includes
specific and tough financial safeguards, independent audits,
and strict limits on administrative costs. Funding is directed
to proven, successful public health programs.
Californians pay more than $8 billion each year in medical
costs due to smoking—that’s $700 per family per year—
whether you smoke or not. The Department of Health Services
report confirms that Prop. 86 will help reduce those costs.
Big tobacco will do, say, and spend anything to defeat
Proposition 86. Don’t believe it.
Save Lives. Reduce Smoking.
Vote Yes on Proposition 86.
MILA GARCIA, R.N., Member
American Heart Association, Western States Affiliate
WILLIE GOFFNEY, M.D., FACS, President
American Cancer Society, California Division 2006–07
RICK DONALDSON, Ph.D., RCP, Chair
American Lung Association of California

Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.

Arguments | 69

86

PROPOSITION

87

ALTERNATIVE ENERGY. RESEARCH, PRODUCTION,
INCENTIVES. TAX ON CALIFORNIA OIL PRODUCERS.
INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT AND STATUTE.

Official Title and Summary

Prepared by the Attorney General

ALTERNATIVE ENERGY. RESEARCH, PRODUCTION,
INCENTIVES. TAX ON CALIFORNIA OIL PRODUCERS.
INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT AND STATUTE.
• Establishes $4 billion program with goal to reduce petroleum consumption by 25%, with research and production
incentives for alternative energy, alternative energy vehicles, energy efficient technologies, and for education and
training.
• Funded by tax of 1.5% to 6% (depending on oil price per barrel) on producers of oil extracted in California.
Prohibits producers from passing tax to consumers.
• Program administered by new California Energy Alternatives Program Authority.
• Prohibits changing tax while indebtedness remains.
• Revenue excluded from appropriation limits and minimum education funding (Proposition 98) calculations.

Summary of Legislative Analyst’s Estimate of Net State and Local Government Fiscal Impact:
• New state revenues—depending on the interpretation of the measure—from about $225 million to $485 million
annually from the imposition of a severance tax on oil production, to be used to fund $4 billion in new alternative
energy programs over time.
• Potential reductions of state revenues from oil production on state lands of up to $15 million annually; reductions
of state corporate taxes paid by oil producers of up to $10 million annually; local property tax reductions of a few
million dollars annually; and potential reductions in fuel-related excise and sales taxes.

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst

BACKGROUND

87

California Oil Production. In 2005, California’s
estimated oil production (excluding federal offshore
production) totaled 230 million barrels of oil—an
average of 630,000 barrels per day. California’s
2005 oil production represents approximately
12 percent of U.S. production, making California the third
largest oil-producing state, behind Texas and Alaska. Oil
production in California peaked in 1985 and has declined,
on average, by 2 percent to 3 percent per year since then. In
2005, California oil production supplied approximately 37
percent of the state’s oil demand, while Alaska production
supplied approximately 21 percent, and foreign oil supplied
about 42 percent.
Virtually all of the oil produced in California is
delivered to California refineries. In 2005, the total
supply of oil delivered to oil refineries in California
70 | Title and Summary/Analysis

was 674 million barrels, including oil produced in
California as well as outside the state. Of the total
oil refined in California, approximately 67 percent goes to
gasoline and diesel (transportation fuels) production.
Oil-Related Taxation in California. Oil producers pay the
state corporate income tax on profits earned in California.
Oil producers also pay a regulatory fee to the Department
of Conservation (which regulates the production of oil in
the state) that is assessed on production, with the exception
of production in federal offshore waters. This regulatory
fee is used to fund a program that, among other activities,
oversees the drilling, operation, and maintenance of oil wells
in California. Currently, producers pay a fee of 6.2 cents per
barrel of oil produced, which will generate total revenues of
$14 million in 2006–07. Additionally, property owners in
California pay local property taxes on the value of both oil
extraction equipment (such as drills and pipelines) as well
as the value of the recoverable oil in the ground.

ALTERNATIVE ENERGY. RESEARCH, PRODUCTION, prop
INCENTIVES. TAX ON CALIFORNIA OIL PRODUCERS.
INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT AND STATUTE.

87

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

PROPOSAL
Severance Tax on Oil Production in California.
Beginning in January 2007, the measure would impose a
severance tax on oil production in California to generate
revenues to fund $4 billion in alternative energy programs
over time. (The term “severance tax” is commonly used to
describe a tax on the production of any mineral or product
taken from the ground, including oil.) The measure defines
“producers,” who are required to pay the tax, broadly to
include any person who extracts oil from the ground or
water, owns or manages an oil well, or owns a royalty
interest in oil.
The severance tax would not apply to federal offshore
production beyond three miles from the coast. The measure
is unclear as to whether the severance tax would apply to oil
production on state-owned lands (which includes offshore
production within three miles of the coast) or production
on federal lands in the state. Additionally, the severance
tax would not apply to oil wells that produce less than ten
barrels of oil per day, unless the price of oil at the well
head was above $50 per barrel. At current prices and levels
of production, the tax would apply to about 230 million
barrels of oil produced in the state annually if state and
federal lands are included, or about 200 million barrels of
oil production annually if they are not included.
Tax Rate Structure. The measure states that the tax
would be “applied to all portions of the gross value of each
barrel of oil severed as follows:”
• 1.5 percent of the gross value of oil from $10 to $25 per
barrel;
• 3.0 percent of the gross value of oil from $25.01 to $40
per barrel;
• 4.5 percent of the gross value of oil from $40.01 to $60
per barrel; and
• 6.0 percent of the gross value of oil from $60.01 per
barrel and above.
The wording of the measure regarding the application of
the tax rates could be interpreted in two different ways. On
one hand, it could be interpreted such that the tax would
be applied on a single rate basis on the full gross value of
oil per barrel. For example, if the gross value is $70 per
barrel, the tax would be applied at a rate of 6.0 percent on
For text of Proposition 87 see page 160.

the full $70—yielding a tax of $4.20 per barrel. On the
other hand, it could be interpreted to apply on a marginal
rate basis similar to the income tax. For example, if the
gross value is $70 per barrel, the first $10 is not taxed,
the value from $10 to $25 is taxed at 1.5 percent, and so
on—yielding a tax of $2.17 per barrel.
In general, for a given period of time, the single rate
interpretation would generate twice as much tax revenue
as would the marginal rate interpretation. The issue of
the application of the tax would presumably be resolved
by regulations adopted by the California State Board of
Equalization (BOE) and interpretation by the courts.
Passing Along the Cost of the Tax to Consumers. The
measure states that producers would not be allowed to pass
on the cost of this severance tax to consumers through
increased costs for oil, gasoline, or diesel fuel. The
BOE is charged with enforcing this prohibition against
passing on the cost of the tax. While it may be difficult to
administratively enforce this provision (due to the many
factors that determine oil prices), economic factors may
also limit the extent to which the severance tax is passed
along to consumers. For example, the global market for
oil means that California oil refiners have many options
for purchasing crude oil. As a result, oil refiners facing
higher-priced oil from California producers could, at some
point, find it cost-effective to purchase additional oil from
non-California suppliers, whose oil would not be subject
to this severance tax.
Term of the Tax. The measure directs that the new
California Energy Alternatives Program Authority
(Authority), discussed below, shall spend $4 billion for
specified purposes within ten years of adopting strategic
plans to implement the measure. The revenues are to be used
for new spending (that is, they cannot be used to replace
current spending). Under the measure, the Authority has
the ability to raise program funds in advance of collecting
severance tax revenues by selling bonds that would be paid
back with future severance tax revenues.
The severance tax would expire once the Authority has
spent $4 billion and any bonds issued by the Authority are
paid off. The length of time that the tax would be in effect
will depend on several factors, including the interpretation
of the tax rate, the future price and production of oil, and
Analysis | 71

87

prop ALTERNATIVE ENERGY. RESEARCH, PRODUCTION,
TAX ON CALIFORNIA OIL PRODUCERS.
87 INCENTIVES.
INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT AND STATUTE.
Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)
decisions about using bonds. Because the measure directs
the new authority to spend $4 billion within ten years, the
tax will be in effect at least long enough to generate this
amount of revenue and longer if bonds are issued.
Depending on these variables, the term of the tax would
range from less than ten years to several decades. For
example, the shorter period would result under the single
tax rate and/or higher oil prices and production levels.
Alternatively, a longer period would result under the
marginal tax rate and/or lower oil prices and production.
Tax Revenues to be Deposited in New Special Fund.
The proceeds of the severance tax would be deposited in
a new fund created by the measure, the California Energy
Independence Fund. These revenues would not be eligible
for loan or transfer to the state’s General Fund and would
be continuously appropriated (and thus, not subject to the
annual state budget appropriation process).

87

Reorganized State Entity to Spend the Tax Revenues.
The measure would reorganize an existing body in state
government, the California Alternative Energy and
Advanced Transportation Financing Authority, into a
new California Energy Alternatives Program Authority
(Authority). This reorganized authority would be governed
by a board made up of nine members, including the
Secretary for Environmental Protection, the Chair of the
State Energy Resources Conservation and Development
Commission, the Treasurer, and six members of the
public who have specific program expertise, including:
economics, public health, venture capital, energy
efficiency, entrepreneurship, and consumer advocacy. The
Authority is required to develop strategic plans and award
funds to encourage the development and use of alternative
energy technologies. The board would appoint a staff to
administer various programs specified in the measure.
One of the stated goals of the measure, to be achieved
through the various programs funded by it, is to reduce the
use of petroleum in California by 25 percent from 2005
levels by 2017. The actual reduction would depend on the
extent to which the measure was successful in developing
and promoting—and consumers and producers used—new
technologies and energy efficient practices.
Allocation of Funds. The funds generated from the
severance tax, as well as any bonding against future
72 | Analysis

severance tax revenues, would be allocated as follows,
after first covering debt-service costs and expenses to
collect the severance tax:
• Gasoline and Diesel Use Reduction Account (57.50
Percent)—for incentives (for example, consumer loans,
grants, and subsidies) for the purchase of alternative fuel
vehicles, incentives for producers to supply alternative
fuels, incentives for the production of alternative fuel
infrastructure (for example, fueling stations), and grants
and loans for private research into alternative fuels and
alternative fuel vehicles.
• Research and Innovation Acceleration Account
(26.75 Percent)—for grants to California universities
to improve the economic viability and accelerate the
commercialization of renewable energy technologies and
energy efficiency technologies.
• Commercialization Acceleration Account (9.75
Percent)—for incentives to fund the start-up costs and
accelerate the production and distribution of petroleum
reduction, renewable energy, energy efficiency, and
alternative fuel technologies and products.
• Public Education and Administration Account (3.50
Percent)—for public education campaigns, oil market
monitoring, and general administration. Of the 3.5 percent,
at least 28.5 percent must be spent for public education,
leaving a maximum of 71.5 percent of the 3.5 percent (or
roughly 2.5 percent of total revenues) for the Authority’s
administrative costs.
• Vocational Training Account (2.50 Percent)—for job
training at community colleges to train students to work
with new alternative energy technologies.

FISCAL EFFECTS
New State Revenues to Be Used for Dedicated
Purposes. Our estimates below are based on 2005 oil
production levels and the average price of oil for the first
six months of 2006. The severance tax would rise from
about $225 million to $485 million annually. The level of
revenue generated would depend both on (1) whether the
tax was interpreted using the marginal rate interpretation
or the single rate interpretation and (2) whether oil
production on state and federal lands is taxed. However,
actual revenues collected under the measure will depend

ALTERNATIVE ENERGY. RESEARCH, PRODUCTION, prop
INCENTIVES. TAX ON CALIFORNIA OIL PRODUCERS.
INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT AND STATUTE.

87

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)
on both future oil prices and oil production in the state. As
these variables are difficult to predict, there is uncertainty
as to the level of revenue collections.
State and Local Administrative Costs to Implement
the Measure. Because programs of the size and type to be
overseen by the Authority have not been undertaken before
in the area of transportation fuels, the administrative costs
to the Authority to carry out the measure are unknown.
Under the provisions of the measure, up to 2.5 percent
of revenues in the new fund would be available to the
Authority for its general administration costs. This would
on average set aside from about $5 million to $12 million
annually for administration. The amount of administrative
funds available would depend both on (1) whether the tax
was interpreted using the marginal rate interpretation or the
single rate interpretation and (2) whether oil production on
state and federal lands is taxed.
Costs to BOE to collect the severance tax and
administrative costs associated with the issuance
and repayment of bonds by the Treasurer’s Office are
not counted as part of the Authority’s administration
budget and are to be paid from the severance tax
revenues. Additionally, in oil-producing counties, local
administrative costs would increase by an unknown but
probably minor amount, due to increased reassessment
activity by local property tax assessors to account for
the effects of the severance tax on oil-related property
values.
Reduction in Local Property Tax Revenues. Local
property taxes paid on oil reserves would decline under
the measure relative to what they otherwise would have
been, to the extent that the imposition of the severance
tax reduces the value of oil reserves in the ground and its
assessed property value for tax purposes. Although the
exact size of this impact would depend on future oil prices,
which determine both the severance tax rate and the value
of oil reserves, it would likely not exceed a few million
dollars statewide annually.
Reduction in State Income Tax Revenues. Oil
producers would be able to deduct the severance tax
from earned income, thus reducing their state income
tax liability under the personal income tax or corporation
tax. The extent to which the measure would reduce state
income taxes paid by oil producers would depend on

For text of Proposition 87 see page 160.

various factors, including whether or not an oil producer
has taxable income in any given year, the amount of such
income that is apportioned to California, and the tax rate
applied to such income. We estimate that the reduction
would likely not exceed $10 million statewide annually.
Potential Reduction in State Revenues From Oil
Production on State Lands. The state receives a portion of
the revenues from oil production on state lands, including
oil produced within three miles of the coast. If the measure
is interpreted to apply to production on these state lands,
then the severance tax would reduce state General Fund
revenues by $7 million to $15 million annually, depending
on whether the measure is interpreted using the marginal
rate or the single rate.
Potential Reductions in Fuel Excise Tax and Sales
Tax Revenues. The measure could change both the amount
and mix of fuels used in California, and thus excise and
sales tax revenues associated with them. For example, to
the extent that the programs funded by the measure are
successful in reducing the use of oil for transportation
fuels, it would reduce to an unknown extent the amount of
gasoline and diesel excise taxes paid to the state and the
sales and use taxes paid to the state and local governments.
These reductions would be partially offset by increased
taxes paid on alternative fuels, such as ethanol, to the
extent that the measure results in their increased use.
Potential Indirect Impacts on the Economy. In addition
to the direct impacts of the measure, there are potential
indirect effects of the measure that could affect the level of
economic activity in the state.
On one hand, by increasing the cost of oil production, the
severance tax could reduce production, reduce investment
in new technologies to expand production, and/or modestly
increase the cost of oil products to Californians. This could
have a negative impact on the state’s economy.
On the other hand, using revenues from the severance
tax to invest in new technologies may spur economic
development in California. This would occur to the extent
that new technologies supported by the measure are
developed and/or manufactured in the state. This could
have a positive impact on the state’s economy.
Taken together, these economic factors could have
mixed impacts on state and local tax revenues.
Analysis | 73

87

Prop ALTERNATIVE ENERGY. RESEARCH, PRODUCTION,
TAX ON CALIFORNIA OIL PRODUCERS.
87 INCENTIVES.
INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT AND STATUTE.

ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 87
YES ON 87: MAKE OIL COMPANIES PAY THEIR FAIR
SHARE—FOR CLEANER ENERGY.
Had enough of oil companies charging outrageous prices
and making obscene profits?
Had enough polluted air, asthma, lung disease, and cancer?
Had enough of oil companies funding opposition to Cleaner,
Cheaper Energy? Enough is enough.
It’s time to make oil companies pay their fair share so we
can use cheaper alternative fuels and reduce air pollution that
causes lung disease and cancer.
VOTING YES ON PROPOSITION 87 WILL MAKE OIL
COMPANIES PAY THEIR FAIR SHARE.
In Louisiana, Alaska, and even Texas, oil companies pay
billions in oil drilling fees, but they pay almost nothing in
California. California takes in more revenue from hunting and
fishing licenses than it does from oil drilling fees.
Under Prop. 87, the oil companies will finally pay us the
same level of fees they pay in other states.
They can afford it. The oil companies opposing this
initiative made $78 billion in profits last year. Their profits
are so high that EXXON gave its CEO Lee Raymond a $400
million retirement payout. Enough is enough.
PROP. 87: NO COST TO CONSUMERS. OIL
COMPANIES PAY.
California’s Attorney General has confirmed that Prop. 87
makes it illegal for oil companies to raise gas prices to pass
along the cost to us.
If they do, they’ll break the law and could be prosecuted.
The U.S. Supreme Court has already ruled that states
can prohibit oil companies from passing fees like this on to
consumers. Just look at the other states that have oil drilling
fees. They all pay less for gas than California.
That’s why oil companies are spending millions to defeat
Prop. 87: because they know it’s illegal to pass the cost on to us.

PROP. 87: CLEANER ENERGY AND CLEANER AIR.
Prop. 87 makes oil companies pay for cleaner energy.
It provides for cash rebates to consumers who buy cleaner,
alternative fuel vehicles and incentives for more renewable
energy like solar and wind power.
It will create thousands of new jobs and economic growth.
It will reduce our dependence on oil from Saudi Arabia and
Iraq—which provide 47% of California’s imported oil.
Voting YES on Prop. 87 will reduce air pollution in
California.
Pollution from cars and trucks is making us sick. Every
year, cars put tons of lung-damaging smog and soot into the air
that send children to the hospital and cause asthma attacks.
That’s why the Coalition for Clean Air and California
doctors and nurses ALL SUPPORT Proposition 87.
PROP. 87: NO NEW BUREAUCRACY.
Prop. 87 uses an existing state agency and requires strict
enforcement and accountability through independent audits,
public hearings, and annual progress reports.
Nobel-prize-winning scientists, California environmental
and consumer groups, educators, labor and agriculture groups
all agree. It’s time we take control of our future.
For Cleaner Air—For Alternative Energy Choices—For
Less Dependence on Foreign Oil . . . Finally, Fairness.
MAKE OIL COMPANIES PAY THEIR FAIR SHARE.
VOTE YES ON 87. FOR CLEANER ENERGY.
www.YESon87.com
LAURA KEEGAN BOUDREAU, CEO
American Lung Association of California
WINSTON HICKOX, Former Secretary
California Environmental Protection Agency
JAMIE COURT, President
Foundation for Taxpayer and Consumer Rights

REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 87

87

“The sponsors’ contention that Proposition 87 would not
cause higher gas prices is incorrect.”—William Hamm, Ph.D.
Former Legislative Analyst, State of California
“Proposition 87 attempts a worthy goal, but does so in
a counterproductive and costly manner. It would shrink
California’s oil supply, increase dependence on foreign
oil, and result in higher gasoline prices.”—Professor
Philip Romero, Ph.D., Former Chief Economist, California
Governor’s Office
Proposition 87 is not a tax on oil company profits—as
proponents would like you to believe. It’s a $4 BILLION TAX
on California oil production. It would make California’s oil
the highest taxed in the nation, by far. Analysts report it would
decrease state oil production. Replacement oil would have to be
imported from the Middle East and elsewhere. The added costs
of transporting and refining imported oil would be lawfully
passed on to consumers at the gas pump. Do we really want
higher gas prices?
And, did proponents really claim Proposition 87 is not new
bureaucracy? It’s the very definition of bureaucracy, with an
appalling lack of accountability:
74 | Arguments

— 50 political appointees.
— Unlimited staff.
— The power to spend $4 billion outside the state budget
review process.
— No requirement they spend all those new taxes in
California, or even in the U.S.
— Special exemptions from laws designed to protect
taxpayers.
— Special exemption from California’s education funding
guarantee, robbing schools of their fair share.
Proposition 87 also reduces revenues available for fire
protection and public safety.
Organizations representing 85,000 public safety officials
urge Californians to: VOTE NO on 87.
KEVIN R. NIDA, President
California State Firefighters’ Association
RAY HOLDSWORTH, Past Chair
California Chamber of Commerce
ALLAN ZAREMBERG, President
Californians Against Higher Taxes

Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.

ALTERNATIVE ENERGY. RESEARCH, PRODUCTION, Prop
INCENTIVES. TAX ON CALIFORNIA OIL PRODUCERS.
Initiative Constitutional Amendment AND STATUTE.

87

ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 87
AREN’T GAS PRICES HIGH ENOUGH ALREADY?
DO WE REALLY WANT TO INCREASE OIL TAXES
BY ANOTHER $4 BILLION?
We all agree we need to advance alternative energy.
But, Proposition 87 is not the way to get there. Increasing
California oil taxes by $4 BILLION to fund a new state
bureaucracy—that isn’t even required to produce results—is
a recipe for waste, not progress.
It’s also the road to more problems . . .
HIGHER TAXES ON DOMESTIC OIL = MORE
DEPENDENCE ON FOREIGN OIL.
Economists report that taxing California oil production will
reduce in-state oil production and increase our dependence on
foreign oil. Oil from the Middle East and other countries costs
more to get here and costs more to refine once here.
HIGHER OIL TAXES, HIGHER GAS PRICES.
Prop. 87’s sponsors claim it won’t increase gas prices. Are
voters supposed to believe a $4 BILLION tax increase on
California oil won’t impact gas prices at the pump?
PROP. 87 CREATES A NEW STATE BUREAUCRACY
WITH 50 POLITICAL APPOINTEES.
It lets them spend taxes outside the normal checks and
balances that govern other state agencies, outside the state
budget review process, and exempt from important laws and
taxpayer safeguards that apply to other agencies.
PROP. 87 LETS THE NEW BUREAUCRACY KEEP
SPENDING EVEN IF THEY’RE NOT PRODUCING
RESULTS.
It lets the political appointees tax and spend, year after
year after year, even if they’re making absolutely no progress
reducing oil consumption or advancing alternative energy use.
PROP. 87 ROBS SCHOOLS OF THEIR FAIR SHARE
OF NEW REVENUES.
One of the most important protections our schools have
is a constitutional guarantee that a portion of new state tax
revenues be spent in the classroom. But, Prop. 87 excludes

itself from that requirement. One of California’s leading
education finance experts and the former Secretary of
Education reports: “At a time when California school funding
is already below the national average, Prop. 87 could deny
schools their fair share of up to $1.9 billion in new revenues
over the next 10 years.”
PROP. 87 WOULD REDUCE TAX REVENUES USED
FOR EDUCATION, PUBLIC SAFETY, HEALTH CARE,
AND TRANSPORTATION NEEDS.
Prop. 87 would reduce general fund and property tax
revenues. Read the Legislative Analyst’s report in your voter
pamphlet.
HIGHER GAS PRICES HURT FAMILIES, SMALL
BUSINESSES, AND SENIORS.
Everyone bears the cost of high gas prices. The last thing we
need is a ballot proposition that further drives up oil prices.
EVERYONE AGREES WE NEED TO ADVANCE
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY, BUT PROP. 87 IS NOT THE
WAY TO GET THERE.
“Gasoline prices in California are high enough already.
Proposition 87 would just add insult to injury. This $4
billion oil tax would result in even higher gas prices
at the pump. We recommend drivers vote: NO on 87.”
—Thomas V. McKernan, President and CEO,
Automobile Club of Southern California
Join more than 150 organizations, taxpayer groups,
consumers, California businesses, labor, parents, educators,
seniors, and public safety officials . . .
VOTE NO on 87. It’s a recipe for waste, not progress.
LARRY McCARTHY, President
California Taxpayers’ Association
DANIEL CUNNINGHAM, President
California Small Business Alliance
MARIAN BERGESON, Past President
California School Boards Association

REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 87
DO YOU TRUST THE OIL COMPANIES?
Oil companies are paying for the multimillion dollar
misinformation campaign against Prop. 87.
See for yourself: California State Website:www.cal-access.ss.ca.gov
Notice the oil companies didn’t sign the statement at the top of
this page? What else are they hiding? THE FACTS:
• PROP. 87 MAKES OIL COMPANIES PAY THEIR FAIR
SHARE.
Oil companies pay billions in drilling fees in New Mexico,
Alaska, Louisiana, and even Texas. California is the only
state where the oil companies do not pay similar drilling
fees.
• PROP. 87 MAKES IT ILLEGAL FOR OIL COMPANIES
TO PASS THE COST ON TO CONSUMERS BY RAISING
GAS PRICES. Official Initiative Language, § 42004(c)
Think about it: If the oil companies could really pass the
cost on to us, why would they be spending millions to defeat
Prop. 87?
• PROP. 87 MEANS CLEANER AIR, LESS ASTHMA.
That’s why Prop. 87 is endorsed by the American Lung
Association.
• PROP. 87 MEANS MORE ALTERNATIVE FUELS AND

LESS DEPENDENCE ON FOREIGN OIL.
Almost half of California’s imported oil comes from Saudi
Arabia and Iraq. Prop. 87 would reduce our dependence on
foreign oil. That’s why former Secretary of State Madeleine
Albright endorses Prop. 87.
• PROP. 87 HAS NO NEW BUREAUCRACY.
Prop. 87 requires independent audits, strict limits on
administrative spending, open meetings with accountability,
and oversight by public health and energy experts—not
politicians. Official Initiative Language, § 26004(a)
DON’T BE FOOLED BY THE OIL COMPANIES.
ENOUGH IS ENOUGH. MAKE THE OIL COMPANIES
PAY THEIR FAIR SHARE.
VOTE YES ON 87. FOR CLEANER, CHEAPER
ENERGY.
DR. MARIO MOLINA, Nobel Prize in Chemistry
University of California, San Diego
TIM CARMICHAEL, President, Coalition for Clean Air
JAMIE COURT, President
Foundation for Taxpayer and Consumer Rights

Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.

Arguments | 75

87

PROPOSITION

88

EDUCATION FUNDING. REAL PROPERTY PARCEL TAX.
INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT AND STATUTE.

Official Title and Summary

Prepared by the Attorney General

EDUCATION FUNDING. REAL PROPERTY PARCEL TAX.
INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT AND STATUTE.
• Provides additional public school funding for kindergarten through grade 12.
• Funded by $50 tax on each real property parcel.
• Exempts certain elderly and disabled homeowners.
• Funds must be used for class size reduction, textbooks, school safety, Academic Success facility
grants, and data system to evaluate educational program effectiveness.
• Provides for reimbursement to General Fund to offset anticipated decrease in income tax revenues due
to increased deductions attributable to new parcel tax.
• Requires school district audits, penalties for fund misuse.
• Revenue excluded from minimum education funding (Proposition 98) calculations.

Summary of Legislative Analyst’s Estimate of Net State and Local Government Fiscal Impact:
• State parcel tax revenue of roughly $450 million annually, allocated to school districts for specified
education programs.
Analysis by the Legislative Analyst

BACKGROUND

88

State and local governments in California impose
several types of taxes and use the resulting revenue
to support a variety of government activities.
The most significant state taxes are on personal
income, the sale of most types of goods (such as
cars, appliances, and furniture), and corporate
profits. At the local level, the most significant tax is
on the assessed value of property (such as familyowned land and houses, retail stores, and industrial
facilities). In California, the revenue generated from
these various taxes is used to fund many types of
government programs, including education, health,
social, and environmental programs.
Local Property Taxes. Local governments in
California impose a tax based on the assessed
value of property. Under such a tax, the amount
owed increases as the value of the property
increases. Some local governments also impose a
type of property tax known as a parcel tax. Under
76 | Title and Summary/Analysis

this type of tax, the amount owed is typically the
same for each parcel—or unit—of land. (Currently,
state government does not impose either type of
property-related tax.)
Use of Local Parcel Tax Revenue. Local parcel
tax revenue may be used for virtually any designated
purpose. In recent years, for example, parcel taxes
have been approved by voters in several school
districts and used to fund class size reduction (CSR),
school libraries, education technology, and other
education programs. In those school districts that have
a parcel tax, this revenue can be a significant source
of funding for kindergarten through grade 12 (K–12)
education programs. Statewide, however, the parcel
tax is a minor source of funding for school districts.

PROPOSAL
Proposition 88 creates a statewide parcel tax
and uses the resulting revenue to fund specific K–12
education programs. It would take effect July 1, 2007.

EDUCATION FUNDING. REAL PROPERTY PARCEL TAX. prop
INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT AND STATUTE.

88

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

Creates a Statewide $50 Parcel Tax
The measure adds a new section to the State
Constitution that establishes an annual $50 tax
on most parcels of land in California. (This dollar
amount would not change over time.) For purposes
of the measure, a “parcel” is defined as any unit
of real property in the state that currently receives
a separate local property tax bill. This definition
would result in the vast majority of individuals and
businesses that currently pay property taxes being
subject to the new parcel tax. The measure exempts
from the new tax any parcel owner who: (1) resides
on the parcel, (2) is eligible for the state’s existing
homeowner’s property tax exemption, and (3) is
either 65 years of age or older or a severely and
permanently disabled person.
The measure also includes a provision that
ensures funding for other government programs is
not affected. Specifically, the measure authorizes
a transfer of parcel tax revenue to the state General
Fund to offset any loss in state income tax revenue.
A loss would occur because of additional propertyrelated deductions resulting from the state parcel tax.

allocated to school districts, public charter schools,
and county offices of education using a new per
student formula to be created by the Legislature.
The formula likely would provide higher per
student funding rates for higher-cost students.
(Specifically, the formula is to account for cost
differences resulting from students’ disabilities,
English language skills, or socioeconomic status.)
Facility grants would be allocated to school districts
and public charter schools using a flat funding
rate (capped at $500) for each student enrolled
in certain schools performing above average. For
the data system, the measure does not specify how
or to whom funding would be allocated. (Future
legislation likely would be needed clarifying such
issues.) School districts receiving any Proposition
88 funds would be required to conduct an annual
independent audit showing how they spent these
monies and post the audit reports online.
FIGURE 1
Proposition 88: Allocation of Parcel Tax Revenues

Funds Specific K–12 Education Programs
With Tax Proceeds

Program

Most of the revenue generated by the statewide
parcel tax would be transferred to a new state
special fund. Of the monies initially deposited in
this fund, the measure allocates $470 million for
various K–12 education programs and initiatives, as
shown in Figure 1. The annual allocation of funding
would be adjusted on a proportional basis—up or
down—to reflect actual revenues received. These
monies would have to supplement existing monies
provided for these programs.

K–12 class size reduction
Instructional materials
School safety
Facility grants
Data system

$175b
100b
100b
85c
10d

Total

$470

The measure allocates monies to school districts
(and other local education agencies) in various
ways. The bulk of funding (amounts for K–12 CSR,
instructional materials, and school safety) would be

For text of Proposition 88 see page 169.

Annual Target Amount

(In Millions)a

a

Amounts adjusted annually, on a proportional basis, to reflect actual
revenues available.
b

School districts, county offices of education, and public charter
schools would be eligible to receive funding. Funding to be distributed
using a weighted per student formula.

c
School districts and public charter schools meeting certain criteria
would be eligible to receive funding. Funding to be based on an equal
per student amount that is capped at $500.
d
The measure does not specify how or to whom funds would be
distributed.

Analysis | 77

88

prop EDUCATION FUNDING. REAL PROPERTY PARCEL TAX.

88 INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT AND STATUTE.
Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

K–12 CSR. Currently, the state provides $1.8
billion for the CSR program for kindergarten
through grade 3 (K–3). This program funds
school districts for reducing the size of their K–3
classrooms to no more than 20 students. The
additional $175 million provided by this measure
could be used to further reduce class size in grades
K–3 or for any other CSR initiative. For example,
the funds would be sufficient to reduce the average
class size of fourth grade by about four students
(reducing it from a statewide average of about 29
students to 25 students).
Instructional Materials. Currently, the state
provides over $400 million annually for instructional
material purchases. This equates to about $66 per
K–12 student. This is sufficient to purchase one new
core textbook for most students in most grades each
school year. The additional $100 million provided
by this measure could be used for purchasing any
textbooks or other instructional materials that were
approved by the State Board of Education. Funds
likely would be sufficient to provide about 25
percent of K–12 students with one additional core
textbook each year.

88

School Safety. Currently, the state provides $548
million (or about $90 per student) for after school
programs, $97 million (or about $40 per grade 8–
12 student) for general school safety programs, and
$17 million (or about $3 per student) for competitive
school safety grants. The additional $100 million
(or about $16 per student) provided by this measure
could be used for school community policing and
violence prevention, gang-risk intervention, and
afterschool and intersession programs.
Facility-Related Grants. Currently, the state
provides funds for school facilities primarily
using general obligation bonds. In addition, it has
provided $9 million annually for the last several
years to help public charter schools in low-income
areas cover some of their facility lease costs. The
78 | Analysis

$85 million provided by this measure would be
for school districts and charter schools that have
not yet received any state general obligation bond
monies for school facilities. In addition, charter
schools are only eligible if they are governed by or
operated by a nonprofit public benefit corporation.
If those conditions are met, then school districts
and charter schools would receive funding for each
student enrolled in a school ranking in the top 50
percent based on the state’s standardized test scores.
They could use the grants for any general purpose.
Districts and schools receiving such grants would
be prohibited from receiving future state general
obligation bond monies unless the bond expressly
allowed them to receive such funding. We estimate
that about 40 noncharter schools (serving less than
1 percent of all noncharter enrollment) would be
eligible for grants. For charter schools, we estimate
about 100 schools (serving about 25 percent of all
charter enrollment) would be eligible for grants.
Data System. Currently, the state provides
virtually no state funding expressly for the
ongoing collection and maintenance of studentlevel and teacher-level data. The additional $10
million provided by this measure would be for
an integrated longitudinal data system. Such a
system would allow the state to measure student
and teacher performance over time. The measure
requires school districts to collect and report the
data needed to create and maintain the system.

FISCAL EFFECTS
We estimate the statewide parcel tax would
result in roughly $450 million in new tax revenue
each year. Given that the dollar amount of the tax
would not increase, total parcel tax revenues would
grow slowly over time as new parcels of land were
created (such as by new subdivisions of property).
Roughly $30 million of the parcel tax revenue

EDUCATION FUNDING. REAL PROPERTY PARCEL TAX. prop
INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT AND STATUTE.

88

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

would be transferred annually to the state General
Fund to offset a projected decline in state income
tax revenues (due to increased property-related
tax deductions). In addition, the measure sets
aside no more than 0.2 percent (or approximately
$1 million annually) for county administration of
the parcel tax. The remainder of new tax revenue

would be allocated to schools for the specified
education programs. These revenues likely would
be somewhat less than that needed to meet the
measure’s designated funding levels. If so, the
program allocations would be adjusted downward
proportionally.

88

For text of Proposition 88 see page 169.

Analysis | 79

Prop EDUCATION FUNDING. REAL PROPERTY PARCEL TAX.

88 Initiative Constitutional Amendment AND STATUTE.
ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 88
PROPOSITION 88: A SMART INVESTMENT FOR
OUR SCHOOLS, OUR STUDENTS, AND CALIFORNIA’S
FUTURE
Consider:
• Students in one-third of California classrooms don’t have
a textbook to take home —and many don’t even have a
textbook to use in class.
• Teachers are paying for school materials out of their own
pockets.
• Too many California classrooms are still overcrowded.
• Prop. 88 will help California graduate the skilled,
educated workforce that is critical to a healthy business
environment and our state’s economic prosperity.
PROP. 88: LOCAL CONTROL OF DOLLARS FOR
CLASSROOMS
The education needs of communities and schools are not all
the same. Prop. 88 provides needed funding directly to local
schools and school districts so that they, not the Legislature,
decide where to spend the funds.
Prop. 88 will provide dedicated funding to:
• Reduce class size so students get more individualized
instruction
• Provide textbooks and other learning materials, so teachers
don’t have to pay for these fundamental necessities out of
their own pockets
• Make schools safer for students and teachers and help
stop campus violence and gangs
PROP. 88: A PRUDENT AND FAIR INVESTMENT
Prop. 88 will put over $500 million a year directly into
our local schools through a nominal (about 14¢ per day/$50
per year) property parcel assessment. Funds from Prop. 88
will be used to invest in our teachers and students, providing
local schools with needed resources, like textbooks,
computers, and other materials. TEACHERS SHOULDN’T
HAVE TO DIP INTO THEIR OWN POCKETS TO PAY
FOR CLASSROOM MATERIALS.
To protect those on fixed incomes, PROP. 88 EXEMPTS

SENIOR AND DISABLED HOMEOWNERS [SECTION
21.5(b)].
PROP. 88: STRICT ACCOUNTABILITY AND ANNUAL
AUDITS
Funds from Prop. 88 are prohibited from being used for
administrative overhead and the Legislature cannot redirect the
money to other programs [Section 6.2].
To ensure that funds go to classrooms and student learning,
Prop. 88 requires annual independent audits [Section 6.2.(5)c]
and penalties for misuse.
With Prop. 88, we know exactly where the money goes and
we can make sure it is spent wisely.
PROP. 88: THE NEXT STEP IN IMPROVING OUR
K–12 EDUCATION SYSTEM
Taxpayers have invested in our school system by approving
local and state bonds to build new classrooms and remodel outof-date facilities. But bonds don’t pay for teachers, textbooks, or
other learning materials and supplies. Prop. 88 puts funds in our
classrooms and allows local educators to use the funds where
they are most needed.
PROP. 88: A VOTE FOR TEACHERS AND OUR KIDS
Teachers have one of the most important jobs. Yet their jobs
are made difficult because of overcrowded classrooms and
a lack of basic supplies. YES on Prop. 88 will help provide
teachers the resources they need to teach our children and give
children the attention they need and deserve.
READ PROP. 88 FOR YOURSELF. IT’S A SMALL
INVESTMENT NOW THAT CAN MAKE A BIG
DIFFERENCE FOR OUR FUTURE.
Vote YES on 88: More Textbooks and Learning Materials,
Smaller Classes, and Safer Schools!
REED HASTINGS, Past President
California State Board of Education
JACK O’CONNELL, California State Superintendent of
Public Instruction

REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 88

88

The California Parents-Teachers Association (PTA) says
“NO on Proposition 88.”
Would the PTA say “No on 88” if it helped our kids’
schools?
Proposition 88 is tricky and misleading. There is NOT
ONE WORD in Proposition 88 about helping teachers who
buy materials.
And, 88 gives the impression all funds will go to
classrooms. Nonsense! Proposition 88 creates layers of
costly new bureaucracies and expands old bureaucracies—
for a program which forever bans Proposition 88’s facilities
grants to more than 95% of our kids’ schools!
This whole new kind of parcel property tax would be
collected from 10 million property owners by 58 county tax
collectors—with new special exemptions.
Then your money goes to the State Legislature, which
decides who gets your tax money. (Proposition 88—
Section 6.2[d])
Then 1000+ school districts collect new data from 9300+
California schools.
80 | Arguments

Then Proposition 88 requires analysis from a new
“integrated longitudinal teacher and student data system as
defi ned by the Legislature.” (Section 6.2 [b] [5])
County Treasurer Paul McDonnell says: “Proposition 88
is a costly administrative nightmare, creating new layers of
expensive bureaucracy.”
Proposition 88 creates a whole new kind of property tax,
needing only a majority vote to pass, opening the floodgates to
new parcel property tax propositions. A tax with no termination
date—it lasts forever. All so fewer than 5% of our kids’ schools
can ask the State Legislature for a facilities grant?
Our kids, our schools, and our taxpayers deserve better.
Much better.
Parents, Teachers, and Taxpayers agree . . . NO on 88!
CLIFFORD CORIGLIANO, SR., Teacher of the Year, 2003
ART PEDROZA, Member
California and American Federations of Teachers, AFL-CIO
LORIE McCANN, Parent-Teachers Association Local President

Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.

EDUCATION FUNDING. REAL PROPERTY PARCEL TAX. Prop
Initiative Constitutional Amendment AND STATUTE.

88

ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 88
All Californians want better schools, but the promoters of
Proposition 88 have taken the wrong approach. Concerned
teachers and parents have joined with taxpayer groups and
small business organizations to oppose Proposition 88.
Here’s why:
• Proposition 88 does nothing to assure that funds raised in
your community are spent on your schools. Proposition
88 lets the State Legislature give your tax money to any
school district in the state.
• Proposition 88 creates a whole new kind of statewide
property tax. Currently, all property taxes are collected
locally and are used for local services, such as improving
your local schools, reducing traffic congestion, improving
health care, and increasing firefighting, paramedic, and law
enforcement capabilities. The Prop. 88 property parcel tax
goes to the State first.
• Proposition 88 would impose the first statewide property
tax since 1910 and would encourage other special interests
to pass more and bigger property parcel taxes for their self
interest causes.
• Opening the door to the new property parcel tax could lead
to huge new property taxes, contrary to the clear intent
of Proposition 13 to limit property taxes. We could see
owners of small homes or mom-and-pop stores taxed out
of their homes and shops.
• This new tax is never ending; we will pay it forever,
whether it does anything to help schools or not!
• Proposition 88 gives Sacramento politicians increased
power to decide where and how to spend your money.
• Proposition 88 uses a loophole to get around the twothirds vote requirement in Proposition 13 to increase
taxes. Proposition 13 requires a two-thirds voter approval
to impose a local property parcel tax. Proposition 88
would impose a new statewide property parcel tax with
only a simple majority vote. As a result, it is much easier

to impose new statewide parcel taxes than a local parcel
tax. This is another good reason to stop statewide property
parcel taxes now before we are flooded with property
parcel tax propositions.
People concerned about our kids and schools say:
“As a public school teacher, nothing is more important to
me than the quality of our schools. Proposition 88 is poorly
drafted, it will result in tax money raised in our community
being spent by the State Legislature anywhere in the state.”
—Lillian T. Perry, Middle School Teacher
Teacher of the Year 2002
“We are the parents of two children in public schools
and are active in our PTA. We are very concerned about the
impact of Proposition 88 on our local schools and are voting
NO.”
—Paul and Susanna Fong
El Dorado Hills
“Most of the school teachers I know are voting No on
Proposition 88. It’s bad for our schools and bad for our
kids.”
—Kate McGowan-Otto, 4th Grade Teacher
Winner, Honorary Service Award, 2005
Proposition 88 doesn’t solve problems; it creates new
ones. That’s why Parents and Teachers agree with Taxpayers
and Small Business Owners. Vote NO on Proposition 88.
For more information visit: www.noprop88.com.
DR. TOM BOGETICH, Executive Director
California State Board of Education (Ret.)
JON COUPAL, President
Howard Jarvis Taxpayers Association
JOEL FOX, President
Small Business Action Committee

REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 88
Please read Proposition 88 for yourself. It’s a modest
investment to help ensure students have updated textbooks,
smaller classes, and safer campuses.
Two ultra conservative special interest groups are
opposing this measure, just like they’ve opposed other efforts
to improve public education in our state. They have never
proposed a solution to fix our schools. Instead, they hide
behind a smokescreen of distortions and will say anything to
stop Prop. 88.
But don’t just take our word for it. READ 88 FOR
YOURSELF. Then please join teachers, parents, businesses,
and taxpayers around the state in voting YES on 88.
Prop. 88 will:
• Ensure that teachers won’t have to pay for classroom
learning materials out of their own pocket.
• Protect students from gangs and violence on our school
campuses.
• Reduce class sizes so students can get the attention they
deserve.

• Keep the funds out of the hands of Sacramento politicians
to ensure that EVERY DOLLAR goes to our local schools
and that EVERY COMMUNITY BENEFITS.
• Provide taxpayers and businesses an even stake in
improving our schools.
• Require the most strict accountability requirements and
standards ever proposed to make sure the funds don’t get
wasted.
• Protect the most vulnerable by exempting seniors and
disabled homeowners.
• Ensure that homeowners are still protected from higher
taxes due to increased property values.
Yes on Prop. 88—It’s a small investment with big
returns—smaller classes, new textbooks, and more learning
materials.
SHELBI WILSON, California Teacher of the Year, 2006
RUSSELL “RUSTY” HAMMER, Former Chamber of
Commerce Executive
STEPHANIE PRIDMORE, Local PTA President

Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.

Arguments | 81

88

PROPOSITION

89

POLITICAL CAMPAIGNS. PUBLIC FINANCING.
CORPORATE TAX INCREASE. CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION AND
EXPENDITURE LIMITS. INITIATIVE STATUTE.

Official Title and Summary

Prepared by the Attorney General

POLITICAL CAMPAIGNS. PUBLIC FINANCING.
CORPORATE TAX INCREASE. CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION AND
EXPENDITURE LIMITS. INITIATIVE STATUTE.
• Provides that candidates for state elective office meeting certain eligibility requirements, including
collection of a specified number of $5.00 contributions from voters, may voluntarily receive public
campaign funding from Fair Political Practices Commission, in amounts varying by elective office and
election type.
• Increases income tax rate on corporations and financial institutions by 0.2 percent to fund program.
• Imposes new limits on campaign contributions to state-office candidates and campaign committees,
and new restrictions on contributions by lobbyists, state contractors.
• Limits certain contributions and expenditures by corporations.

Summary of Legislative Analyst’s Estimate of Net State and Local Government Fiscal Impact:
• Increased revenues (primarily from increased taxes on corporations and financial institutions) totaling
more than $200 million annually. The funds would be spent on the public financing of political
campaigns for state elected officials.
Analysis by the Legislative Analyst

OVERVIEW OF THE MEASURE
This proposition makes major changes to the
way that political campaigns for state candidates
and ballot measures are funded. Candidates could
choose to receive public funding for the costs of
their campaigns. For those candidates choosing
not to receive public funding, existing limits on
the amount of political donations (“contributions”)
would be lowered. Figure 1 shows the main
provisions of the measure, which are discussed in
more detail below.

89

BACKGROUND
Current Limits on Political Contributions.
Candidates for state offices collect private donations
from individuals, corporations, political parties,
and other organizations (such as labor unions and
nonprofit organizations) to pay for the costs of
their political campaigns. The maximum amount
of money that each person or group can give to a
82 | Title and Summary/Analysis

candidate is determined by state law. The limits were
last changed when voters approved Proposition 34
at the November 2000 general election. Current
limits on the amount of money that can be given
depend on the office being sought and who is
giving the donation. For instance, an individual can
give a candidate for the state Assembly a donation
of up to $3,300. On the other hand, a political party
can give that same candidate as much money as
it chooses. A candidate can accept donations any
time before an election and can spend without limit
any money that is collected.
Role of Committees and Independent
Expenditures. Rather than make donations directly
to candidates, some individuals and groups choose
to make political donations to “committees.” These
committees take donations and then decide which
candidates to give money. For instance, one type
of committee—a small contributor committee—
accepts donations of up to $200 from more than

POLITICAL CAMPAIGNS. PUBLIC FINANCING. prop
CORPORATE TAX INCREASE. CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION AND
EXPENDITURE LIMITS. INITIATIVE STATUTE.

89

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

100 individuals and then distributes the funds
to candidates. Other individuals, groups, and
committees choose to spend money on political
campaigns without giving money directly to
candidates. Instead, they make “independent
expenditures” without coordinating with the
candidate. These independent expenditures,
such as television commercials or newspaper
advertisements, may encourage voters to support
or oppose a candidate. There are no limits on the
amount of money that can be donated for or spent
on independent expenditures.
FIGURE 1

Ballot Measures. There are no limits on the
amount of money that can be collected or spent for
and against state ballot measures (propositions).
State Government’s Responsibilities. The
state’s campaign finance laws are administered by
the Secretary of State (SOS) and the Fair Political
Practices Commission (FPPC). Under state law,
individuals and groups must tell SOS how much
money has been given, received, and spent on
political campaigns. This information is available
to the public—generally on the Internet. The FPPC
is in charge of enforcing the laws to make sure
candidates and donors obey the rules. The FPPC can
assess fines on candidates violating election laws.

Proposition 89: Main Provisions
✔ Public Funding for Political Candidates
• A candidate for state office meeting certain
requirements could receive state funds to pay for
the costs of a political campaign.
• The amount of state funds that a candidate would
receive would go up if an opponent spent more in
private funds.
✔ Lower Contribution Amounts for Privately Funded
Candidates
• For candidates choosing not to receive public
funding, the amount of money that could be
collected from each individual, corporation, or
other group would be lower than is currently the
case.

PROPOSAL
This measure makes significant changes to
state laws regarding the financing of campaigns
for elected state offices and state ballot measures.
The measure’s provisions regarding candidates for
office generally affect only state elected officials
(see Figure 2).
FIGURE 2
State Elected Officials Covered by Proposition 89
Statewide Officials
Governor

✔ Contribution Restrictions for State Ballot Measures
• Places new limits on contributions to candidates’
efforts to support or oppose ballot measures.

Lieutenant Governor
Attorney General

• Places new limits on contributions from
corporations to support or oppose ballot
measures.

Secretary of State

✔ Higher Corporate Taxes
• Increases tax rate on corporations and financial
institutions. For corporations, tax rate would
increase from 8.84 percent to 9.04 percent. For
financial institutions, tax rate would increase from
10.84 percent to 11.04 percent.

Insurance Commissioner

• Raises over $200 million each year to implement
the measure.

For text of Proposition 89 see page 171.

Treasurer

89

Controller

Superintendent of Public Instruction

Legislature
Senators (40)
Assembly Members (80)

Board of Equalization Members (4)

Analysis | 83

prop POLITICAL CAMPAIGNS. PUBLIC FINANCING.
TAX INCREASE. CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION AND
89 CORPORATE
EXPENDITURE LIMITS. INITIATIVE STATUTE.
Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

PUBLIC FUNDING FOR POLITICAL CANDIDATES
The measure establishes a system for candidates
to receive public funds to pay for the costs of
campaigning for state offices.

Requirements to Receive Money
In order to receive public funding for a
campaign, a candidate would have to meet certain
requirements:
• $5 Donations and Signatures. A candidate would
be required to collect a number of $5 donations
(“qualifying contributions”) and signatures from
residents prior to a primary election. As shown
in Figure 3, the required number of donations
would range from 750 to 25,000 depending on
the office sought. The measure requires that
these donations be paid to the state.
• Private Contributions. To receive public
funding, a candidate could not receive private
campaign funding, with two main exceptions.
First, beginning up to 18 months prior to a
primary election, the measure allows candidates
to collect and spend start-up contributions, or
“seed money.” (These funds could be used, for
instance, to pay costs for collecting the qualifying
contributions and signatures.) The measure
restricts these types of donations to $100 each.
Total donations would be limited to between
$10,000 and $250,000 depending on the office
(see Figure 3). These funds could only be spent
until 90 days prior to a primary election. Second,

candidates would continue to be able to receive
donations from political parties. Donations from
political parties would be subject to the same
limits as for candidates choosing not to receive
public funds (described below).
• Other Requirements. By accepting public
funding, a candidate would be subject to
some additional requirements. For example,
candidates would be required to participate in
public debates before each election. In addition,
candidates could not use their personal funds to
pay for campaign costs.

Public Funding Provided
Those candidates meeting the requirements
described above would become eligible to receive
public funds. As shown in Figure 3, the amount
of funding would vary based on (1) the office
sought and (2) whether it was a primary or general
election. For instance, for a primary election, a
candidate running for the Assembly could receive
$250,000 for the primary election and an additional
$400,000 for the general election (if successful in
the primary election). A candidate for Governor
could receive $10 million in the primary election
and an additional $15 million in the general
election. The FPPC would administer the funds and
make disbursements using a debit card system.
Additional Public Funds. In cases where a
candidate’s opponent chose not to participate in
the public financing system, the measure allows a

FIGURE 3
Proposition 89: Public Financing Provisions for Major Party Candidates
Initial Steps

89
Office

Assembly
Senate
Board of Equalization
Statewide officials
Governor

84 | Analysis

Public Financing Available

NUMBER OF
$5 CONTRIBUTIONS

MAXIMUM START-UP
CONTRIBUTIONS

PRIMARY
ELECTION

GENERAL
ELECTION

750
1,500
2,000
7,500
25,000

$10,000
20,000
30,000
75,000
250,000

$250,000
500,000
250,000
2,000,000
10,000,000

$400,000
800,000
400,000
2,000,000
15,000,000

POLITICAL CAMPAIGNS. PUBLIC FINANCING. prop
CORPORATE TAX INCREASE. CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION AND
EXPENDITURE LIMITS. INITIATIVE STATUTE.

89

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

participating candidate to receive additional funds
in some cases. Specifically, if an opponent spent
more in private funds than the amount of public
funds available, additional public funds would be
provided to the candidate on a dollar-for-dollar
basis. Similarly, a participating candidate would
receive additional public funds if independent
expenditures were made in support of an opponent.
The maximum amount of additional public funds
that a candidate could receive is capped under the
measure (generally five times the original amount
provided to a candidate and four times the amount
for a candidate for Governor). For instance, the
maximum amount of additional public funds that
a candidate for the Assembly could receive for a
primary election would be $1.25 million.
Funds for Expenses While in Office. Under
current law, state elected officials generally may
use leftover campaign funds to pay for some
expenses while in office. Under the measure, those
candidates who accept public financing and win
their election would be eligible to receive annual
payments to cover similar expenses. Members of
the Legislature would receive $50,000 each year
while in office and other state officials would
receive $100,000 each year.

Minor Party and Independent Candidates
The amounts shown in Figure 3 are for

candidates representing major parties (generally,
parties whose nominee for Governor in the last
election received at least 10 percent of the vote).
Under the measure, candidates from minor parties
and independent candidates are eligible to receive
smaller amounts of public funds. Depending on the
situation, a minor party or independent candidate
could receive as much as one-half of the amount
that a major party candidate receives.

LOWER CONTRIBUTION AMOUNTS FOR PRIVATELY
FUNDED CANDIDATES
Lower Campaign Contributions. For those
candidates who choose not to participate in the
public financing of campaigns, the measure
imposes new limits for campaign donations to
candidates. The measure’s limits generally are
much more restrictive than is now the case. For
instance, currently individuals, corporations,
and other groups can donate $3,300 per election
to a candidate for the Legislature. This measure
would restrict contributions to $500 for legislative
candidates. Currently, political parties can give
unlimited amounts to candidates. Under the
measure, a political party’s donations would be
limited. For example, a political party could give
a privately funded candidate for Assembly up to
$20,000 for a general election. These new limits
are summarized in Figure 4.

FIGURE 4
Campaign Contribution Limits for Privately Funded Candidates (For Each Election)
Individual, Group, or
Corporation

Assembly
Senate
Board of Equalization
Statewide officials
Governor

Small Contributor
Committee

Political Party

CURRENT

PROPOSITION 89

CURRENT

PROPOSITION 89

CURRENT

PROPOSITION 89 a

$3,300
3,300
5,600
5,600
22,300

$500
500
500
1,000
1,000

$6,700
6,700
11,100
11,100
22,300

$2,500
2,500
2,500
2,500
2,500

No limit
No limit
No limit
No limit
No limit

$20,000
40,000
20,000
200,000
750,000

a
Amounts shown are for general elections. Primary election limits are between one-half and two-thirds of the amounts shown. Political party limits would apply
to both privately and publicly funded candidates.

For text of Proposition 89 see page 171.

Analysis | 85

89

prop POLITICAL CAMPAIGNS. PUBLIC FINANCING.
TAX INCREASE. CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION AND
89 CORPORATE
EXPENDITURE LIMITS. INITIATIVE STATUTE.
Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

Other Restrictions on Campaign Contributions.
The measure also adds other types of restrictions on
campaign contributions related to privately funded
candidates, which are summarized in Figure 5.
• Independent Expenditure Contribution Limit.
The measure restricts donations to $1,000
each year to a committee for independent
expenditures. As under current law, individuals
could make unlimited independent expenditures
if they spent the money on their own, without the
use of a committee.
• Overall Donation Limit. The measure also adds
new limits on the overall amount of political
contributions that a person or group can make
to candidates and committees in a year. The total
amount that could be donated to all types of
committees to support or oppose state candidates
would be limited to $15,000. Of this total,
however, any contributions over $7,500 would
be required to go for independent expenditures.
• Lower Political Party Contribution Limit.
The measure lowers an existing limit on annual
contributions to political parties from $27,900 to
$7,500.
• Lobbyist Restrictions. Under existing
law, lobbyists are prohibited from making
contributions to candidates. The measure also
forbids lobbyists from making donations to
political parties and committees.

• State Contractor Restrictions. Under existing
law, those individuals and entities receiving state
contracts are not subject to any special restrictions
on political contributions. The measure forbids,
in some instances, those receiving state contracts
from making donations to candidates, political
parties, and committees.

CONTRIBUTION RESTRICTIONS FOR STATE BALLOT
MEASURES
Unlike donations for candidates, the amount of
money donated by entities to support or oppose
state ballot measures currently is not subject to
contribution limits. This measure places two new
restrictions on donations for ballot measures:
• First, when a candidate for state office is
significantly involved with a committee that
supports or opposes a ballot measure, individuals,
corporations, and other groups would be limited
to a $10,000 contribution to that committee.
• Second, corporations would be prohibited from
making contributions or spending more than
$10,000 to support or oppose a ballot measure.
(Nonprofit corporations meeting certain
requirements would not be subject to this
restriction.) Corporations, however, could
establish special committees to collect voluntary
donations from employees for additional
expenditures.

FIGURE 5
Other Changes Under Proposition 89

89

Current

Proposition 89

No limit

$1,000

$27,900
No limit

7,500
15,000a

No limit
No limit

$10,000
10,000

Candidate-Related Contributions
• Total annual contribution to an independent expenditure committee to support or
oppose a candidate.
• Total annual contributions to political parties for candidate-related expenditures.
• Total annual contributions to all types of committees for candidate-related
expenditures.

Ballot Measure Contributions
• Contributions for or against a ballot measure where a candidate is significantly involved.
• Contributions for or against a ballot measure by a corporation.
a

Contributing more than $7,500 is allowed only for independent expenditures.

86 | Analysis

POLITICAL CAMPAIGNS. PUBLIC FINANCING. prop
CORPORATE TAX INCREASE. CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION AND
EXPENDITURE LIMITS. INITIATIVE STATUTE.

89

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)

FISCAL PROVISIONS
Higher Corporate Taxes. In order to pay for
the measure’s provisions (primarily for the public
financing of campaigns), the measure increases taxes
on corporations and financial institutions beginning
in 2007. The measure increases the income tax rates
paid by corporations from 8.84 percent to 9.04
percent. For financial institutions, the rate would rise
from 10.84 percent to 11.04 percent.
Other Revenues. In addition, the measure would
result in other, small sources of revenues, primarily
the collection of candidates’ $5 contributions and
fines on candidates violating election laws. (Under
current law, fines for violating election laws are
deposited into the state’s General Fund.)
Total Amount of Funds. The total amount of
funds that could be held by the state at any time for
the measure’s purposes would be limited to about
$900 million. (The formula determining this amount
would be adjusted for inflation every two years.)
Any amount over this limit would be transferred to
the state’s General Fund. If there were not enough
money to fully fund the measure’s provisions, the
measure authorizes FPPC to proportionately reduce
the amount of funds available to each candidate.

OTHER PROVISIONS
Administration Costs. The measure provides that
a minimum of $3 million (adjusted for inflation
every two years) of the new funds would go to
FPPC to pay for the administration of the measure.
The SOS would also be required to use some of the
funds for a voter education campaign.
Election Procedures. The measure makes a
number of other changes to election procedures.
For instance, the measure prohibits any candidate
(whether receiving public financing or not) from
collecting campaign donations earlier than 18
months prior to a primary election. Also, the measure
changes what counts as independent and political
expenditures prior to an election. These changes

For text of Proposition 89 see page 171.

would result in more spending being subject to
donation limits and disclosure requirements.

FISCAL EFFECTS
New Revenues. We estimate that the measure
would raise over $200 million annually. Virtually
all of this amount would come from the increased
taxes on corporations and financial institutions.
Small amounts would come from the collection
of candidates’ $5 contributions and fines on
candidates violating election laws. Since fines for
violating election laws are currently deposited in
the state’s General Fund, the measure would slightly
reduce General Fund revenues (by about $1 million
annually).
New Spending. The new funds would pay for
costs associated with the measure. We estimate
costs to administer the provisions of the measure
and pay for voter education would be in the range
of several million dollars each year. (There would
be additional one-time costs, largely for computer
systems and voter education, to set up the public
financing of campaigns for the first time.) The
remaining funds would be available for candidates
who choose to receive public funds for their political
campaigns. The amount of spending on the public
financing of election campaigns would depend
on a number of factors and vary from election to
election. Among the factors affecting spending
would be:
• The number of candidates accepting public funds.
• The amount of money spent by candidates not
receiving public financing (which would determine
the level of any additional public funds).
The measure provides that total spending could
not exceed the amount of money available from
the increased revenues. Assuming that the number
of candidates in each election does not increase
significantly from current levels, there probably would
be sufficient funds available to provide all candidates
with the amounts allowed under the measure.

Analysis | 87

89

Prop POLITICAL CAMPAIGNS. PUBLIC FINANCING.
TAX INCREASE. CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION AND
89 CORPORATE
EXPENDITURE LIMITS. Initiative STATUTE.

ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 89
VOTE YES TO TAKE A STAND AGAINST THE
POWER OF SPECIAL INTERESTS AND LOBBYISTS IN
CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT.
VOTE “YES” ON PROPOSITION 89, THE CLEAN
MONEY AND FAIR ELECTIONS ACT
We have a crisis of corruption in our government marked
by scandal after scandal and criminal investigations of
politicians from both parties. It is time for Californians to
clean up this corruption and make politicians accountable to
voters instead of big money campaign contributors.
THE PROBLEM
Right now, special interests like big oil companies, the
drug giants, the insurance industry, and HMOs can get their
way in Sacramento by donating millions to elect politicians
who will owe them favors. Lobbyists and special interests use
campaign contributions to pass their pork barrel projects and
create tax loopholes—costing consumers and taxpayers like
you billions of dollars each year.
THE SOLUTION: PROPOSITION 89
If you’re dissatisfied with the way campaigns are funded
in California and the effect of campaign contributions on
state government, Vote Yes on Prop. 89.
YOUR “YES” VOTE WILL:
1. Help level the playing field and make our elections more
fair and competitive—so that candidates with the best
ideas have a chance to win, even if they are not rich or well
connected to wealthy special interest groups and lobbyists.
2. Require candidates to adhere to strict spending limits and
reject special interest contributions in order to qualify for
public financing.
3. Ban contributions to candidates by lobbyists and state
contractors.
4. Set limits on outside, so-called “independent” campaign
committees created by big contributors to influence elections.
5. Limit to $10,000 the amount corporations can spend
directly on ballot measure campaigns.

6. Restrict contributions by corporations, unions, and
individuals to $500 for candidates for state Legislature,
$1,000 to candidates for statewide office.
7. Establish tough penalties, including jail time and removing
candidates from office who break the law.
NOT FUNDED BY INDIVIDUAL TAXPAYERS OR THE
STATE BUDGET
Proposition 89 is specifically funded by a modest increase
in the corporate income tax rate—raising it from 8.84% to
9.04%. The resulting corporate income tax rate would still be
less than it was from 1980 until 1996. Corporations should
pay their fair share in taxes.
WHEN YOU HEAR THE ARGUMENTS AGAINST
PROPOSITION 89, REMEMBER:
• Opposition to Proposition 89 is being led and funded by
the big oil companies, drug companies, the insurance
industry, HMOs, and other entrenched interests.
• Proposition 89 was drafted and reviewed by experts in
constitutional and election law and put on the ballot and
backed by Democrats, Republicans, and independent voters.
• The opponents of Proposition 89 want to keep the system
exactly the way it is, because they know it works for
them, NOT for you. They are making false claims against
Proposition 89 because they want to keep political power
for themselves rather than having fair elections that make
politicians accountable to the voters.
VOTE YES ON PROPOSITION 89! RETURN ELECTIONS
TO THE VOTERS AND REDUCE THE POWER OF THE
SPECIAL INTERESTS.
DEBORAH BURGER, RN, President
California Nurses Association
HARVEY ROSENFIELD, Founder
Foundation for Taxpayer and Consumer Rights
SUSAN LERNER, Executive Director
California Clean Money Campaign

REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 89

89

Here’s what you should know before voting:
recently thrown out by the Supreme Court. The truth—Prop. 89
is a complicated, 55-page measure that won’t work.
PROPOSITION 89 IS A TAX INCREASE TO PAY FOR
PROP. 89 IS UNFAIR
POLITICIANS’ NEGATIVE POLITICAL CAMPAIGNS
And the biggest deception of all—the authors of
The supporters of Proposition 89 won’t tell you that what
Proposition 89 are special interests too! They wrote Prop. 89
this measure really does, plain and simple, is raise taxes by
so they can still contribute BIG MONEY to ballot initiatives,
hundreds of millions of dollars so politicians can run their
while small businesses, nonprofits, and others are virtually
campaigns at taxpayers’ expense.
SHUT OUT. Prop. 89 is a power grab by a single special
Everything we don’t like about political campaigns—
interest to dominate elections under the guise of campaign
negative television ads and junk mail in our mailboxes—
reform.
would still be there. The only difference is OUR TAX
DOLLARS would be paying for it.
DON’T BE FOOLED BY PROP. 89—IT’S PHONY
REFORM.
AFFECTS SMALL BUSINESSES TOO
VOTE NO ON PROP. 89.
They claim that Proposition 89 is about reducing the impact
of big corporations in elections, but it also SEVERELY
LARRY McCARTHY, President
LIMITS the ability of many small businesses from backing
California Taxpayers’ Association
candidates or impacting measures.
That’s why the California Small Business Association
BETTY JO TOCCOLI, Chair
opposes Prop. 89.
California Small Business Roundtable
PROP. 89 IS COMPLICATED AND UNCONSTITUTIONAL
JAMES M. HALL, Former Chair
They say Prop. 89 was crafted by election experts, but they
California Fair Political Practices Commission
don’t tell you that major portions of a similar measure were
88 | Arguments
Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.

POLITICAL CAMPAIGNS. PUBLIC FINANCING. Prop
CORPORATE TAX INCREASE. CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION AND
EXPENDITURE LIMITS. Initiative STATUTE.

89

ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 89
Don’t be fooled by Proposition 89. Prop. 89 is NOT about
cleaning up politics. But, it is 56 pages of new, complicated,
confusing election rules that won’t work.
Proposition 89 was put on the ballot by a single special
interest group, the California Nurses Association, that wants
an UNFAIR advantage in California elections while small
businesses and individuals are effectively SHUT OUT of the
political process. Even other labor organizations like those
representing teachers, firefighters, and law enforcement do
not support Proposition 89, because it RESTRICTS their
participation in the political process as well.
PROPOSITION 89: NOT JUST ABOUT BIG
CORPORATIONS.
The authors of Prop. 89 say they are trying to stop
big corporations from having too much influence. But,
Proposition 89 restricts many small businesses from backing
candidates or supporting and opposing initiatives. Even a
mom-and-pop business, if it is incorporated like many are,
is restricted under Prop. 89.
Proposition 89 also restricts many nonprofit groups that
want to educate voters about the issues they care about. For
example, a group of crime victim advocates will be limited
in warning voters about a candidate who is soft on crime.
Teachers will be limited in helping elect candidates who will
support improving our schools.
PROPOSITION 89: INCREASES TAXES TO PAY FOR
NEGATIVE CAMPAIGNS.
California has many urgent priorities to get our state back
on the right track.
Proposition 89 contains a $200 MILLION TAX
INCREASE and gives that money to politicians to
spend on their negative TV ads and junk mail.
Proposition 89 places virtually no limits on how the
politicians spend their taxpayer-financed campaign funds. It
means that we, the taxpayers, will be paying for their negative
ads!
PROPOSITION 89: WON’T STOP WEALTHY CANDIDATES.

Proposition 89 puts no limits on wealthy candidates who
try to buy California elections.
Under Proposition 89, a politician using taxpayer funds
and running against a wealthy candidate can get up to ten
times the normal taxpayer money to run his campaign. A
candidate for Governor could qualify for up to $200 million
of taxpayer money to run his or her campaign.
PROPOSITION 89: IT’S UNCONSTITUTIONAL!
James Hall, past Chairman of the California Fair Political
Practices Commission, says:
“Proposition 89 is unconstitutional, unfair, and won’t
work.”
Supporters of 89 say it is modeled after measures in
other states. But, the United States Supreme Court recently
found the contribution and expenditure limits in a similar
measure from Vermont unconstitutional because they limit
free speech and violate the First Amendment.
PROPOSITION 89: WE ALREADY HAVE CAMPAIGN
LIMITS.
Californians have already passed a campaign finance
reform law, Proposition 34, which strictly limits contributions
to candidates. This law has survived several court challenges
and is working. We don’t need Prop. 89.
SAY NO to PROPOSITION 89!
Proposition 89 is unfair to small businesses, nonprofits,
and groups representing working Californians. It is a waste
of our precious tax dollars, it’s unconstitutional, and it’s
just another confusing measure that won’t work. Please join
small businesses, taxpayers, educators, organized labor, and
so many others in voting NO on Proposition 89.
ALLAN ZAREMBERG, President
California Chamber of Commerce
TONY QUINN, Former Commissioner
California Fair Political Practices Commission
LARRY McCARTHY, President
California Taxpayers’ Association

REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 89
Elections should be decided by voters, not special interests.
Elections should be about the best ideas, not who has the
most money. Vote YES on Proposition 89 for fair and clean
elections.
Proposition 89:
• Levels the playing field and makes our elections fairer and
more competitive. Advocates for crime victims, education,
healthcare, seniors, and other regular Californians will no
longer be drowned out by big campaign spenders.
• Saves taxpayers money by ending the incentive for
legislative giveaways on lobbyist-driven projects. The
$3.3 billion in corporate tax loopholes today cost each
California household $275 every year.
• Provides the antidote to negative advertising. Candidates
who accept public financing must participate in real
debates and cannot hide behind negative 30-second ads.
• Does not increase taxes on individuals. Small businesses
will not foot the bill.
• Creates a Clean Money public financing system like those
in other states that protects free speech and has been

proven to be effective and constitutional.
• Opens our elections to a diversity of qualified candidates
from all walks of life, like teachers, nurses, and firefighters,
not just those with access to the most money.
• Sets tough penalties for those who violate the law.
The special interests oppose Prop. 89 because they like
the control they have over our political system today. As a
Los Angeles Times headline said, “Prop. 89: So Good It’s
Scary—to Sacramento.”
It is time to put the voters back in charge. VOTE YES ON
PROPOSITION 89.
JACQUELINE JACOBBERGER, President
League of Women Voters of California
RICHARD L. HASEN, JD, Ph.D., Constitutional Election
Law Professor
KATHAY FENG, Executive Director
California Common Cause

Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.

Arguments | 89

89

PROPOSITION

90

GOVERNMENT ACQUISITION, REGULATION OF PRIVATE
PROPERTY. INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT.

Official Title and Summary

Prepared by the Attorney General

GOVERNMENT ACQUISITION, REGULATION OF PRIVATE PROPERTY.
INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT.
• Bars state and local governments from condemning or damaging private property to promote other private
projects or uses.
• Limits government’s authority to adopt certain land use, housing, consumer, environmental and workplace laws
and regulations, except when necessary to preserve public health or safety.
• Voids unpublished eminent domain court decisions.
• Defines “just compensation.”
• Government must occupy condemned property or lease property for public use.
• Condemned private property must be offered for resale to prior owner or owner’s heir at current fair market
value if government abandons condemnation’s objective.
• Exempts certain governmental actions.

Summary of Legislative Analyst’s Estimate of Net State and Local Government Fiscal Impact:
• Increased annual state and local government costs to pay property owners for (1) losses to their property
associated with certain new laws and rules, and (2) property acquisitions. The amount of such costs is
unknown, but potentially significant on a statewide basis.
Analysis by the Legislative Analyst

SUMMARY
This measure amends the California Constitution to:
• Require government to pay property owners for
substantial economic losses resulting from some new
laws and rules.
• Limit government authority to take ownership of
private property.
This measure applies to all types of private property,
including homes, buildings, land, cars, and “intangible”
property (such as ownership of a business or patent).
The measure’s requirements apply to all state and local
governmental agencies.

90

PAYING PROPERTY OWNERS FOR
ECONOMIC LOSSES
State and local governments pass laws and other rules
to benefit the overall public health, safety, or welfare
of the community, including its long-term economy.
(In this analysis, we use the term “laws and rules” to
90 | Title and Summary/Analysis

cover a variety of government requirements, including
statutes, ordinances, and regulations.)
In some cases, government requirements can reduce
the value of private property. This can be the case, for
example, with laws and rules that (1) limit development
on a homeowner’s property, (2) require industries
to change their operations to reduce pollution, or (3)
restrict apartment rents.

PROPOSAL
This measure requires government to pay property
owners if it passes certain new laws or rules that result
in substantial economic losses to their property. Below,
we discuss the types of laws and rules that would be
exempt from the measure’s requirements and those that
might require government compensation.

What Laws and Rules Would Not Require
Compensation?
All existing laws and rules would be exempt from
the measure’s compensation requirement. New laws

GOVERNMENT ACQUISITION, REGULATION OF PRIVATE PROPERTY. prop
INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT.

90

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)
and rules also would be exempt from this requirement
if government enacted them: (1) to protect public health
and safety, (2) under a declared state of emergency, or
(3) as part of rate regulation by the California Public
Utilities Commission.

What Laws and Rules Could Require
Compensation?
While the terms of the measure are not clear, the
measure provides three examples of the types of new
laws and rules that could require compensation. These
examples relate to land use and development and are
summarized below.
• Downzoning Property. This term refers to decisions
by government to reduce the amount of development
permitted on a parcel. For example, a government
action to allow construction of three homes on an
acre where five homes previously had been permitted
commonly is called “downzoning.”
• Limitations on the Use of Private Air Space. This
term generally refers to actions by government
that limit the height of a building. For example, a
government rule limiting how tall a building may
be to preserve views or maintain historical character
often is called a limitation of “air space.”
• Eliminating Any Access to Private Property. This
term could include actions such as closing the only
public road leading to a parcel.
In addition to the examples cited above, the broad
language of the measure suggests that its provisions
could apply to a variety of future governmental
requirements that impose economic losses on property
owners. These laws and rules could include requirements
relating, for example, to employment conditions,
apartment prices, endangered species, historical
preservation, and consumer financial protection.

Would Government Pay Property Owners for
All Losses?
Under current law and court rulings, government
usually is required to compensate property owners
for losses resulting from laws or rules if government’s
action deprives the owners of virtually all beneficial use
of the property.
For text of Proposition 90 see page 187.

This measure specifies that government must pay
property owners if a new law or rule imposes “substantial
economic losses” on the owners. While the measure does
not define this term, dictionaries define “substantial” to
be a level that is fairly large or considerable. Thus, the
measure appears to require government to pay property
owners for the costs of many more laws and rules than
it does today, but would not require government to pay
for smaller (or less than substantial) losses.

EFFECTS ON STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
The measure’s provisions regarding economic
losses could have a major effect on future state and
local government policymaking and costs. The amount
and nature of these effects, however, is difficult to
determine as it would depend on how the courts
interpreted the measure’s provisions and how the
Legislature implemented it. Most notably:
• How Many Laws and Rules Would Be Exempt From
the Requirement That Government Pay Property
Owners for Losses? The measure does not require
government to compensate property owners under
certain circumstances (such as actions to protect
public health and safety). If these exemptions were
interpreted broadly (rather than narrowly), fewer new
laws and rules could require compensation.
• How Big Is a Substantial Economic Loss? If
relatively small losses (say, less than a 10 percent
reduction in fair market value) to a property owner
required compensation, government could be required
to pay many property owners for costs resulting from
new laws and rules. On the other hand, if courts ruled
that a loss must exceed 50 percent of fair market
value to be a substantial economic loss, government
would be required to pay fewer property owners.
Under the measure, state and local governments
probably would modify their policymaking practices to
try to avoid the costs of compensating property owners
for losses. In some cases, government might decide not
to create laws and rules because of these costs. In other
cases, government might take alternative approaches to
achieving its goals. For example, government could:

Analysis | 91

90

prop GOVERNMENT ACQUISITION, REGULATION OF PRIVATE PROPERTY.

90 INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT.
Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)
• Give property owners incentives to voluntarily carry
out public objectives.
• Reduce the scope of government requirements so that
any property owners’ losses were not substantial.
• Link the new law or rule directly to a public health
and safety (or other exempt) purpose.
There probably would be many cases, however, where
government would incur additional costs as a result of
the measure. These would include situations where
government anticipated costs to compensate property
owners at the time it passed a law—as well as cases
when government did not expect to incur these costs.
The total amount of these payments by government to
property owners cannot be determined, but could be
significant on a statewide basis.

LIMITING GOVERNMENT AUTHORITY
TO TAKE PROPERTY
Eminent domain (also called “condemnation”) is the
power of local, state, and federal governments to take
private property for a public use so long as government
compensates the property owner. (In some cases,
government has given the power of eminent domain
to private entities, including telephone and energy
companies and nonprofit hospitals. In this analysis, these
private entities are included within the meaning of
“government.”)

90

Over the years, government has taken private
property to build roads, schools, parks, and other
public facilities. In addition to these uses of eminent
domain, government also has taken property for
public purposes that do not include construction of
public facilities. For example, government has taken
property to: help develop higher value businesses in
an area, correct environmental problems, enhance tax
revenues, and address “public nuisances” (such as
hazardous buildings, blight, and criminal activity).

PROPOSAL
This measure makes significant changes
government authority to take property, including:
92 | Analysis

to

• Restricting the purposes for which government may
take property.
• Increasing the amount that government must pay
property owners.
• Requiring government to sell property back to its
original owners under certain circumstances.
Below, we discuss the major changes proposed by
the measure, beginning with the situations under which
government could—and could not—take property.

Under What Circumstance Could Government
Take Property?
Under the measure, government could take private
property to build public roads, schools, parks, and other
government-owned public facilities. Government also
could take property and lease it to a private entity to
provide a public service (such as the construction and
operation of a toll road). If a public nuisance existed
on a specific parcel of land, government could take
that parcel to correct the public nuisance. Finally,
government could take property as needed to respond
to a declared state of emergency.

What Property Takings Would Be Prohibited?
Before taking property, the measure requires
government to state a “public use” for the property. The
measure narrows the definition of public use in a way
that generally would prevent government from taking
a property:
• To Transfer It to Private Use. The measure
specifies that government must maintain ownership
of the property and use it only for the public use it
specified when it took the property.
• To Address a Public Nuisance, Unless the Public
Nuisance Existed on That Particular Property. For
example, government could not take all the parcels
in a run-down area unless it showed that each and
every parcel was blighted.
• As Part of a Plan to Change the Type of
Businesses in an Area or Increase Tax
Revenues. For example, government could not take
property to promote development of a new retail or
tourist destination area.

GOVERNMENT ACQUISITION, REGULATION OF PRIVATE PROPERTY. prop
INITIATIVE CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT.

90

Analysis by the Legislative Analyst (continued)
In any legal challenge regarding a property taking,
government would be required to prove to a jury that the
taking is for a public use as defined by this measure. In
addition, courts could not hold property owners liable
to pay government’s attorney fees or other legal costs if
the property owner loses a legal challenge.

How Much Would Government Have to Pay
Property Owners?
Current law requires government to pay “just
compensation” to the owner before taking property. Just
compensation includes money to reimburse the owner
for the property’s “fair market value” (what the property
and its improvements would sell for on an open market),
plus any reduction in the value of remaining portions of
the parcel that government did not take. State law also
requires government to compensate property owners
and renters for moving costs and some business costs
and losses.
The measure appears to increase the amount of money
government must pay when it takes property. Under the
measure, for example, government would be required to
pay more than a property’s fair market value if a greater
sum were necessary to place the property owner “in the
same position monetarily” as if the property had never
been taken. The measure also appears to make property
owners eligible for reimbursement for a wider range of
costs and expenses associated with the property taking
than is currently the case.

When Would Government Sell Properties to
Former Owners?
If government stopped using property for the purpose
it stated at the time it took the property, the former owner
of the property (or an heir) would have the right to buy
back the property. The property would be assessed for
property tax purposes as if the former owner had owned
the property continuously.

EFFECTS ON STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS

Relatively few properties are acquired using
government’s eminent domain power. Instead,
government buys most of this property from willing
sellers. (Property owners often are aware, however,
that government could take the property by eminent
domain if they did not negotiate a mutually agreeable
sale.)
A substantial amount of the property that government
acquires is used for roads, schools, or other purposes that
meet the public use requirements of this measure—or is
acquired to address specific public nuisances. In these
cases, the measure would not reduce government’s
authority to take property. The measure, however, likely
would increase somewhat the amount that government
must pay property owners to take their property. In
addition, the measure could result in willing sellers
increasing their asking prices. (This is because
sellers could demand the amount that they would
have received if the property were taken by eminent
domain.) The resulting increase in government’s costs
to acquire property cannot be determined, but could be
significant.
The rest of the property government acquires is used
for purposes that do not meet the requirements of this
measure. In these cases, government could not use
eminent domain and could acquire property only by
negotiating with property owners on a voluntary basis.
If property owners demanded selling prices that were
more than the amount government previously would
have paid, government’s spending to acquire property
would increase. Alternatively, if property owners did not
wish to sell their property and no other suitable property
was available for government to purchase, government’s
spending to acquire property would decrease.
Overall, the net impact of the limits on government’s
authority to take property is unknown. We estimate,
however, that it is likely to result in significant net costs
on a statewide basis.

Government buys many hundreds of millions of
dollars of property from private owners annually.

For text of Proposition 90 see page 187.

Analysis | 93

90

Prop GOVERNMENT ACQUISITION, REGULATION OF PRIVATE PROPERTY.

90 Initiative Constitutional Amendment.
ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 90
Proposition 90 stops eminent domain abuse!
Local governments can take homes, businesses, and
churches through unfair use of eminent domain. They can
also take away your property value with the stroke of a pen.
We are three average Californians, and it happened to us.
Local governments unfairly tried to take our property
away from us and turn it over to developers to build condos,
hotels, and other commercial projects.
Why? Because these developers are politically connected,
and their projects will generate more tax revenue for local
governments.
If government can take our property, it can take yours
too.
• Manuel Romero had eminent domain used against his
family restaurant so that a Mercedes-Benz dealership next
door could use the space for a parking lot.
• Bob Blue had eminent domain used against his small
luggage store—in his family for almost sixty years—so
that a luxury hotel could be built.
• Pastor Roem Agustin had his church threatened
with condemnation so that a developer could build
condominiums.
It’s wrong for senior citizens, small business owners, or
anyone who can’t fight back to be forced to give up their
property so wealthy developers can build giant retail stores,
shopping malls, and upscale housing developments.
Government can also take property without compensating
property owners.
When governments pass regulations that reduce the value
of your property, it’s called regulatory taking. When this
happens you should be compensated by the government for
your lost value.
Government should not be able to take your home—
outright or through regulations that reduce the value of
your property—without it being for a legitimate PUBLIC
use and without paying for what it takes.

That’s simple fairness.
That’s why California needs Proposition 90, the Protect
Our Homes Act.
Proposition 90 will:
• restore homeowners’ rights that were gutted last year
by the Supreme Court’s outrageous Kelo decision. That
ruling allows eminent domain to be used to take homes
and businesses and turn them over to private developers.
• return eminent domain to legitimate public uses, such
as building roads, schools, firehouses, and other needs
that serve the public and not the financial interests of the
government and powerful developers.
• restrict government’s ability to take away people’s use of
their property without compensating them.
Those who benefit financially from the status quo are
spending millions to mislead voters and claim the sky is
falling.
Opponents are engaging in scare tactics in order to divert
attention from their REAL MOTIVE—maintaining the status
quo so they can continue to profit from taking our private
property.
For example, opponents falsely claim that the measure
will hurt the enforcement of environmental regulations. But
all existing California environmental laws and regulations are
expressly protected.
The Protect Our Homes Act protects all of us—and helps
families for future generations—while stopping government
from taking your property simply to boost tax revenue.
Save our homes and businesses.
Please vote YES on Proposition 90.
For more information, visit www.protectourhomes2006.com.
MANUEL ROMERO, Eminent Domain Abuse Victim
BOB BLUE, Eminent Domain Abuse Victim
PASTOR ROEM AGUSTIN, Eminent Domain Abuse Victim

REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF PROPOSITION 90
Of course we can all agree that Californians deserve
protection from eminent domain abuse. And, if Prop. 90 was

90

a well-designed reform of eminent domain, many thoughtful
Californians would support it.
However, the out-of-state drafter of Prop. 90 is attempting
a bait and switch on voters. This poorly-written proposition
is loaded with unrelated and far-reaching provisions that will
harm, not protect, homeowners and be very expensive for all
California taxpayers.
We can’t afford to be misled.
The hidden provisions in Prop. 90 create a new category of
lawsuits that allow wealthy landowners and corporations to
sue for huge new payouts. These lawsuits and payouts would
cost California taxpayers billions of dollars every year.
That’s why groups representing taxpayers, homeowners,
businesses, police and fire, environmentalists, and farmers all
urge you to Vote NO on 90.
THE LEAGUE OF WOMEN VOTERS OF CALIFORNIA
says: “Prop. 90 would fundamentally change our system of
94 | Arguments

representative democracy and put the interests of a few above
the well-being of ALL Californians.”
Prop. 90 is anti-taxpayer and anti-homeowner.
That’s why THE LEAGUE OF CALIFORNIA
HOMEOWNERS OPPOSES PROP. 90 and says: “Prop.
90 is a trap that actually hurts homeowners. It would cost
taxpayers billions and erode basic laws that protect our
communities, our neighborhoods, and the value of our
homes.”
Say NO to the Taxpayer TRAP. Vote NO on 90.
www.NoProp90.com
KENNETH W. WILLIS, President
League of California Homeowners
CHIEF MICHAEL L. WARREN, President
California Fire Chiefs Association
JACQUELINE JACOBBERGER, President
League of Women Voters of California

Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.

GOVERNMENT ACQUISITION, REGULATION OF PRIVATE PROPERTY. Prop
Initiative Constitutional Amendment.

90

ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 90
The handful of wealthy landowners that paid to put
Prop. 90 on the ballot are trying a classic bait and switch on
California voters.
They want you to believe Prop. 90 is about eminent
domain. That’s the bait. But, hidden in the fine print of the
measure is the trap—a far-reaching section unrelated to
eminent domain that would lead to huge new costs for all
California taxpayers.
Prop. 90 would change California’s constitution to enable
large landowners and corporations to demand huge payouts
from state and local taxpayers just by claiming a law has
harmed the value of their property or business—no matter
how important the law may be or far-fetched the claim.
According to William G. Hamm, formerly California’s
nonpartisan legislative analyst, “PROP. 90 could require
BILLIONS OF DOLLARS IN NEW TAXPAYER COSTS
EACH YEAR, if communities and the state continue to
pass or enforce basic laws to protect neighborhoods, limit
unwanted development, protect the environment, restrict
unsavory businesses, and protect consumers.”
With no limit on the total costs, Prop. 90 traps taxpayers
into signing a blank check. We all pay, while large
landowners and corporations reap windfall payouts.
Here’s an example of how the “taxpayer trap” works:
If local voters pass a measure to limit a new development
to 500 houses—instead of 2,000 houses that a developer
wants to build—under Prop. 90, the developer could demand
a payment for the value of the remaining 1,500 houses.
Even if local community services and infrastructure would
be strained by the larger development, Prop. 90 would put
taxpayers at risk for payment.
Prop. 90 is not just limited to land-use laws. Read the
official analysis. Statewide consumer protection laws,
restrictions on telemarketing, and worker protections would
all trigger new demands for payouts.

As a result, Prop. 90 would lead to thousands of expensive
lawsuits that would tie up our courts and result in added
bureaucracy and red tape.
The cost of these lawsuits and payouts would rob local
communities of billions of dollars in limited resources that
fund fire and police protection, paramedic response, schools,
traffic congestion relief, and other vital services. That’s
why the CALIFORNIA FIRE CHIEFS ASSOCIATION,
CALIFORNIA POLICE CHIEFS ASSOCIATION, and
CALIFORNIA SCHOOL BOARDS ASSOCIATION oppose
Prop. 90.
PROP. 90 would trap taxpayers in a LOSE-LOSE
situation. If communities act to protect their quality of
life, taxpayers could be forced to make huge payouts. Or,
if communities couldn’t afford the payouts, basic qualityof-life protections simply couldn’t be enacted. That’s why
conservation groups, including the CALIFORNIA LEAGUE
OF CONSERVATION VOTERS and the PLANNING AND
CONSERVATION LEAGUE, warn the measure would
drastically limit our ability to protect California’s coastline,
open spaces, farmland, air and water quality.
For more information on Prop. 90, visit www.NoProp90.com.
When you vote, please join groups representing California
taxpayers, firefighters, law enforcement officers, educators,
small businesses, land conservationists, the environment, and
homeowners.
Say NO to the TAXPAYER TRAP. Vote NO on
PROPOSITION 90.
CHIEF MICHAEL L. WARREN, President
California Fire Chiefs Association
CHIEF STEVE KRULL, President
California Police Chiefs Association
EDWARD THOMPSON, JR., California Director
American Farmland Trust

REBUTTAL TO ARGUMENT AGAINST PROPOSITION 90
DON’T BE FOOLED BY SPECIAL INTERESTS!!!
Proposition 90 protects our fundamental right to own—
and keep—our homes and private property. It’s called the
“AMERICAN DREAM,” and government should not be in
the business of destroying it.
Proposition 90 fixes the Supreme Court’s outrageous Kelo
decision.
Opponents—those who profit most from abusing eminent
domain and taking private property—are shamelessly trying
to mislead you and distort what Proposition 90 does.
Opponents say read the fine print. WE AGREE. You’ll
see:
Proposition 90 MAINTAINS EVERY current state
and local environmental, consumer protection, and public
safety law and regulation. Read Section 6, which states,
“the provisions added to this section shall not apply to any
statute, charter provision, ordinance, resolution, law, rule or
regulation in effect on the date of enactment.”
Proposition 90 HAS NOTHING TO DO with funding for
police or firefighters.

The public health and safety are PROTECTED. The
Legislature can enact ANY NEW LAW to ensure public
health and safety.
Proposition 90 protects YOU from politicians who reward
their campaign contributors by taking your private property
and giving it to someone else.
The REAL opponents of Proposition 90 are those
who profit by TAKING OUR HOMES AND SMALL
BUSINESSES—greedy government bureaucrats who want
higher taxes and mega-developer campaign contributors
who make millions using agricultural land, residential
neighborhoods, businesses, and churches seized through
eminent domain to develop strip malls and other projects.
IF THEY WIN, WE LOSE.
PROTECT OUR HOMES: VOTE YES ON 90.
MIMI WALTERS, Honorary Chair
California Protect Our Homes Coalition
MARTYN B. HOPPER, California Director
National Federation of Independent Business (NFIB)
JOHN M. REVELLI, Eminent Domain Abuse Victim

Arguments printed on this page are the opinions of the authors and have not been checked for accuracy by any official agency.

Arguments | 95

90

An Overview of State Bond Debt
Prepared by the Legislative Analyst’s Office
This section provides an overview of the state’s
current situation involving bond debt. It also discusses
the impact that the bond measures on this ballot would,
if approved, have on the state’s debt level and the costs
of paying off such debt over time.

Background
What Is Bond Financing? Bond financing is a
type of long-term borrowing that the state uses to
raise money for various purposes. The state obtains
this money by selling bonds to investors. In exchange,
it agrees to repay this money, with interest, according
to a specified schedule.
Why Are Bonds Used? The state has traditionally
used bonds to finance major capital outlay projects
such as roads, educational facilities, prisons,
parks, water projects, and office buildings (that is,
infrastructure-related projects). This is done mainly
because these facilities provide services over many
years, their large dollar costs can be difficult to pay
for all at once, and different taxpayers benefit over
time from the facilities. Recently, however, the state
has also used bond financing to help close major
shortfalls in its General Fund budget.
What Types of Bonds Does the State Sell? The
state sells three major types of bonds. These are:
• General Fund-Supported Bonds. These are
paid off from the state’s General Fund, which
is largely supported by tax revenues. These
bonds take two forms. The majority are general
obligation bonds. These must be approved by
the voters and their repayment is guaranteed
by the state’s general taxing power. The second
type is lease-revenue bonds. These are paid off
from lease payments (primarily financed from
the General Fund) by state agencies using the
facilities the bonds finance. These bonds do not
require voter approval and are not guaranteed.
As a result, they have somewhat higher interest
costs than general obligation bonds.
• Traditional Revenue Bonds. These also finance
capital projects but are not supported by the
General Fund. Rather, they are paid off from a
designated revenue stream—usually generated
by the projects they finance—such as bridge
tolls. These bonds also are not guaranteed by the
state’s general taxing power and do not require
voter approval.
• Budget-Related Bonds. In March 2004, the
voters approved Proposition 57, authorizing
$15 billion in bonds to help pay off the state’s
96 | An Overview of State Bond Debt

accumulated budget deficit and other obligations.
Of this amount, $11.3 billion was raised through
bond sales in May and June of 2004, and $3.7
billion is available for later sales. The impact on
the General Fund of paying off these bonds is an
annual cost of about $1.5 billion. (Current law
also allows for additional debt-service payments
from the Budget Stabilization Account—BSA—
established by Proposition 58 in order to pay off
the bonds earlier.) The bonds’ repayments are also
guaranteed by the state’s general taxing power.
What Are the Direct Costs of Bond Financing?
The state’s cost for using bonds depends primarily
on the amount sold, their interest rates, the time
period over which they are repaid, and their
maturity structure. For example, the most recently
sold general obligation bonds will be paid off over
a 30-year period with fairly level annual payments.
Assuming that a bond issue carries a tax-exempt
interest rate of 5 percent, the cost of paying it off
with level payments over 30 years is close to $2 for
each dollar borrowed—$1 for the amount borrowed
and close to $1 for interest. This cost, however, is
spread over the entire 30-year period, so the cost
after adjusting for inflation is considerably less—
about $1.30 for each $1 borrowed.

The State’s Current Debt Situation
Amount of General Fund Debt. As of July 1,
2006, the state had about $45 billion of infrastructurerelated General Fund bond debt outstanding on which
it is making principal and interest payments. This
consists of about $37 billion of general obligation
bonds and $8 billion of lease-revenue bonds. In
addition, the state has not yet sold about $30 billion
of authorized general obligation and lease-revenue
infrastructure bonds. Most of these bonds have been
committed, but the projects involved have not yet
been started or those in progress have not yet reached
their major construction phase. The above totals
do not include the budget-related bonds identified
above.
General Fund Debt Payments. We estimate
that General Fund debt payments for infrastructurerelated general obligation and lease-revenue
bonds were about $3.9 billion in 2005–06. As
previously authorized but currently unsold bonds
are marketed, outstanding bond debt costs will
peak at approximately $5.5 billion in 2010–11. If,
in addition, the annual costs of the budget-related
bonds are included, total debt-service costs were
$5.1 billion in 2005–06, and will rise to a peak of

An Overview of State Bond Debt
Prepared by the Legislative Analyst’s Office
$8.4 billion in 2009–10. (These amounts assume
additional repayments from the BSA.)
Debt-Service Ratio. One indicator of the state’s
debt situation is its debt-service ratio (DSR). This ratio
indicates the portion of the state’s annual revenues
that must be set aside for debt-service payments on
bonds and therefore are not available for other state
programs. As shown in Figure 1, the DSR increased
in the early 1990s and peaked at 5.7 percent before
falling back to below 3 percent in 2002–03, partly
due to some deficit-refinancing activities. The DSR
then rose again beginning in 2003–04 and currently
stands at 4.2 percent for infrastructure bonds. It
is expected to increase to a peak of 4.8 percent in
2008–09 as currently authorized bonds are sold.

Effects of the Bond Propositions
on This Ballot
There are five general obligation bond measures
on this ballot, totaling $42.7 billion in new
authorizations. These include:
• Proposition 1B, which would authorize the
state to issue $19.9 billion of bonds to finance
highway safety, traffic reduction, air quality,
and port security.
• Proposition 1C, which would authorize the state
to issue $2.85 billion of bonds for housing and
development programs.

•

Proposition 1D, which would authorize the
state to issue $10.4 billion of bonds to finance
kindergarten through university education
facilities.
• Proposition 1E, which would authorize the state
to issue $4.1 billion of bonds for flood control
projects.
• Proposition 84, which would authorize the state
to issue $5.4 billion of bonds to fund various
resource-related projects.
The first four measures make up an infrastructure
bond package approved by the Legislature and
Governor. The fifth measure was placed on the
ballot through the initiative process.
Impacts on Debt Payments. If the $42.7 billion
of bonds on this ballot are all approved, they would
require total debt-service payments over the life of
the bonds of about twice that amount. The average
annual debt service on the bonds would depend on
the timing of their sales. If they were sold over a
10-year period, the budgetary cost would average
roughly $2 billion annually.
Impact on the Debt-Service Ratio. Figure 1
shows what would happen to the state’s DSR over time
if all of the bonds were approved and sold. It would
peak at 5.9 percent in 2010–11 and decline thereafter.

FIGURE 1
General Fund Debt-Service Ratio a
7%
Added Cost From Sale of:
Bonds on November 2006 Ballot
Previously Authorized Bonds

6
5
4
3
2

Bonds Already Sold
1

1985–86
a

1995–96

2005–06

Projected

2015–16

Ratio of debt-service payments to revenues and transfers. Excludes budget-related bonds.

An Overview of State Bond Debt | 97

list of candidates for statewide
elective office
Proposition 34 was adopted by the voters at the November 7, 2000 General Election.
Under this measure, any candidate for Governor, Lieutenant Governor, Secretary of State,
Controller, Treasurer, Attorney General, Insurance Commissioner, or Member of the Board of
Equalization, who accepted the voluntary expenditure limit, has an opportunity to purchase a
statement, not to exceed 250 words, in the California Voter Information Guide.
The expenditure limit for candidates running for Governor in the November 7, 2006 General
Election is $11,150,000. The expenditure limit for candidates running for Lieutenant Governor,
Secretary of State, Controller, Treasurer, Attorney General, and Insurance Commissioner in the
November 7, 2006 General Election is $6,690,000. The expenditure limit for candidates running
for the Board of Equalization in the November 7, 2006 General Election is $1,672,000.
The following list of candidates for statewide elective office is current through August 14, 2006.
For a current list of candidates, please see http://www.ss.ca.gov/elections/elections_cand.htm.
In the following list, an asterisk (*) designates candidates who have accepted the voluntary
spending limits.
Gover nor

Secretary of State

Angelides, Phil

Democratic

* Akin, Margie

Peace and Freedom

* Camejo, Peter Miguel

Green

* Bowen, Debra

Democratic

* Jordan, Janice

Peace and Freedom

* Hill, Forrest

Green

* Noonan, Edward C.

American Independent

* Lightfoot, Gail K.

Libertarian

* Olivier, Art

Libertarian

* McMillon, Jr., Glenn

American Independent

Schwarzenegger, Arnold

Republican

* McPherson, Bruce

Republican

Lieutenant Gover nor

Controller

* Alexander, Stewart A.

Peace and Freedom

* Barrón, Elizabeth Cervantes Peace and Freedom

* Garamendi, John

Democratic

Campbell, Warren Mark

American Independent

* King, Jim

American Independent

* Chiang, John

Democratic

* McClintock, Tom

Republican

* Strickland, Tony

Republican

* Shaw, Lynnette

Libertarian

* Tello, Donna

Libertarian

* Warren, Donna J.

Green

* Wells, Laura

Green

* Candidate has accepted voluntary spending limits.
98 | List of Candidates for Statewide Elective Office

list of candidates for statewide
elective office
Treasurer

Board of Equalization

Lockyer, Bill

Democratic

* Noonan, E. Justin

American Independent

Campbell, David

Peace and Freedom

* Parrish, Claude

Republican

* Neighbors, David J.

Republican

* Sanders, Gerald

Peace and Freedom

* Watson, Kennita

Libertarian

* Smithson, Marian

Libertarian

* Yee, Betty T.

Democratic

* Thakker, Mehul M.

Green

District 1

District 2

Attor ney Gener al
Brown, Jerry

Democratic

* Harrison, Jack

Peace and Freedom

Poochigian, Chuck

Republican

* Weissman, Kenneth A.

Libertarian

* Wyman, Michael S.

Green

Insur ance Commissioner

* Leonard, Bill

Republican

Michlin, Willard Del

Libertarian

* Perry, Richard R.

Peace and Freedom

* Raboy, Tim

Democratic

District 3

Christian-Heising, Mary

Democratic

Finley, Mary Lou

Peace and Freedom

* Steel, Michelle

Republican

Burden, Jay Earl

American Independent

* Bustamante, Cruz M.

Democratic

* Cafiero, Larry

Green

Chu, Judy

Democratic

* Condit, Tom

Peace and Freedom

* Forsch, Glen

Republican

Ogden, Dale F.

Libertarian

* Henderson, Cindy Varela

Peace and Freedom

Poizner, Steve

Republican

* Kadera, Monica W.

Libertarian

District 4

* Candidate has accepted voluntary spending limits.
List of Candidates for Statewide Elective Office | 99

CANDIDATE STATEMENTS BY OFFICE
governor

• As the state’s chief executive officer, oversees most state departments and agencies and appoints judges.
• Proposes new laws and approves or vetoes legislation.
• Prepares and submits the annual state budget.
• Mobilizes and directs state resources during emergencies.
Art Olivier
Libertarian Party

www.electArt.com

CUT SPENDING! California recalled the Governor three years ago when he proposed a $96,000,000,000 budget. Now it’s
$131,000,000,000 plus $43,000,000,000 in bonds on the November ballot. NO BENEFITS FOR ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS.
Giving free healthcare and education to illegal immigrants encourages more illegal immigration. California cannot afford
it. END GRIDLOCK. Spend gasoline taxes and vehicle license fees on building more lanes and allow the construction of
private toll roads for commercial trucks. Art Olivier cut taxes and improved services as Mayor and will do it again as our next
Governor!
Janice Jordan
Peace and Freedom Party

www.janicejordan.org

Low-Cost Housing. Universal Health Care. Livable Wage. VOTE YOUR CONSCIENCE! NOT YOUR FEAR!
Peter Miguel Camejo
Green Party

1710 Broadway #122
Sacramento, CA 95818

(510) 587-0807
info@votecamejo.com
www.votecamejo.com

You’ve heard the expression, “I would have to write a book.” Well, I did. It’s called: “California: Under Corporate Rule.”
Corporations control our electoral system, want to privatize our schools, name our sports fields, control our media, destroy
our ecology, and promote wars of plunder. Most profitable corporations pay no state taxes in California. Ninety percent of our
people on average have received no increase in inflation adjusted pay in 35 years and our real minimum wage has dropped
dramatically while our economy more than doubled and corporate profits soared. My web site shows how a FAIR TAX
can raise an additional $25 billion for our budget, allowing us to dramatically increase education funding, begin a massive
move to alternative energy, and modernize our infrastructure, while reducing most people’s taxes. Immigrants actually help
create jobs. Marriage must be an option for everyone. The death penalty, three strikes, and racial profiling must end. Our
outdated, exclusionary, winner-take-all money-controlled electoral system has been universally rejected. We need public
funding, proportional representation, and ranked choice voting, where people feel free to vote for the candidates they support
and can hear all points of view. Please visit votecamejo.com to help us plan and execute these ground-breaking opportunities
for positive change in California. Thank you for your support.
Edward C. Noonan
American Independent Party

1606 Gold St.
Marysville, CA 95901

(530) 743-6878
vote2006@ednoonan4gov.org
www.ednoonan4gov.org

See my webpages: ednoonan4gov.org, http://www.aipca.org, http://www.constitutionparty.org
The order of the candidates is determined by random alphabet drawing. Statements on this page were supplied by the candidates
and have not been checked for accuracy. Each statement was voluntarily submitted by the candidate and is printed at the expense
of the candidate. Candidates who did not submit statements could otherwise be qualified to appear on the ballot.

100 | Candidate Statements

Lieutenant Governor

• Assumes the office and duties of Governor in the case of impeachment, death, resignation, removal from office,
or absence from the state.

• Serves as President of and presides over the State Senate and has a tie-breaking vote.
• Chairs the Economic Development Commission, is a member of the State Lands Commission, and sits on the
boards of the California university systems.

• Serves as an ex-officio member of the California State World Trade Commission.
Lynnette Shaw
Libertarian Party

7336 Santa Monica #822
West Hollywood, CA 90046

(415) 209-3996
lynnette@voteshaw.info
www.voteshaw.info

The war against patients and their physicians must stop. Medical cannabis has been legal for ten years, but the authorities
continue to arrest caregivers, patients, and doctors. This is a waste of time, human resources, and taxpayers’ money. My
Marijuana Peace Plan has been in operation for nine years in Marin County. This program has removed many illegal drug
dealers from our streets, protected patients, and improved the quality of the medicine. Please join with me and Willie Nelson
to help save family farms with industrial hemp and to protect your medical rights. I am Lynnette Shaw, and I would appreciate
your vote for Lt. Governor. www.ca.lp.org
Donna J. Warren
Green Party

P.O. Box 88808
Los Angeles, CA 90009

(213) 427-8519
ecottry@socal.rr.com
www.donnawarren.com

Running with the Million Votes for Peace Campaign, in 1999, I sued the CIA for the crack cocaine infestation in South
Central, and, in 2004, I helped coordinate Prop. 66 to amend California’s Three Strikes Law. I will guide the Legislature
to represent the people, not corporations and special interests. Don’t be fuelish—stop voting for oil companies at the gas
pump. Stop Global Warming, and keep California competitive in science/medical research. For my complete platform, see
www.donnawarren.com.
Stewart A. Alex ander
Peace and Freedom Party

40485 Murrieta Hot Springs Rd., Ste. 149
Murrieta, CA 92563

(909) 223-2067
stewartalexander4paf@comcast.net
www.salt-g.com

Working people need a greater voice in government.

The order of the candidates is determined by random alphabet drawing. Statements on this page were supplied by the candidates
and have not been checked for accuracy. Each statement was voluntarily submitted by the candidate and is printed at the expense
of the candidate. Candidates who did not submit statements could otherwise be qualified to appear on the ballot.

Candidate Statements | 101

Lieutenant Governor
(Continued)
Tom MCClintock
Republican Party

1029 K Street, Suite 44
Sacramento, CA 95814

(916) 446-1246
info@tommcclintock.com
www.HelpTom.com

A generation ago, California was a land of opportunity with low taxes, plentiful jobs, affordable housing, cheap electricity,
and abundant clean water. Our children were secure in their homes and our families were secure in their property. We enjoyed
the finest highway system in the world and the fi nest school system in the country. The only thing that has changed between
then and now is bad public policy—and together we can fix that. During the recall election, I offered a comprehensive plan
to restore California’s quality of life, and I will tenaciously pursue these reforms as Lt. Governor. For 25 years I have fought
to roll back the taxes that are crushing our families, to rein in the bureaucracies that are wasting our money, to reduce the
regulations that are destroying our economy, to oppose the illegal immigration that is overwhelming our services, and to
restore our long-neglected public works. I began the movement to abolish California’s car tax that now saves an average
family $490 in annual DMV fees. I am spearheading the effort to stop government from seizing one citizen’s property
for the private gain of another. And, I continue to battle waste and fraud in Republican and Democratic administrations.
Together, we can restore to our children the Golden State that our parents gave to us. Please visit my Web site at
www.HelpTom.com to see my proposals and to help this grassroots campaign for California’s future.
John Gar amendi
Democratic Party

P.O. Box 496
Sacramento, CA 95812

(916) 863-6881
info@garamendi.org
www.garamendi.org

It’s time we use the Lieutenant Governor’s office as a forceful advocate for children, hardworking families, and retired
Californians. That’s my approach as Insurance Commissioner—protecting consumers, punishing fraud, and delivering results:
Over $1 billion in insurance rebates—$22 billion in auto insurance savings—$24 million in additional homeowner benefits to
fire victims—$46 million in insurance company fines. As Lieutenant Governor I will be the same powerful advocate—working
for you to fully fund schools, helping small businesses thrive in the world marketplace, fighting to provide every Californian
quality healthcare that values people before profits, and protecting women’s rights. As a University of California Regent and
State University Trustee, I’ll be the guardian of higher education—promoting excellence in education, fostering research, and
creating innovation. On the State Lands Commission, I’ll take the same approach I used as President Clinton’s Deputy Interior
Secretary—protecting California’s magnificent coast, parks, and natural resources. I’ll address climate change by promoting
conservation and alternative fuels. I oppose more oil drilling off our coasts and oppose excessive oil company profits. I’ll
fight to stop corporate polluters. I’ll work with the Governor and Legislature to accomplish these goals. California’s teachers,
police, firefighters, Senator Feinstein, and Al Gore share my vision and respect my independence. They endorse my candidacy.
I stand by my record as Insurance Commissioner, Deputy Interior Secretary, State Senator, Academic All-American at U.C.
Berkeley, Harvard MBA, Peace Corps Volunteer, husband, and father. I respectfully request your vote. www.garamendi.org

The order of the candidates is determined by random alphabet drawing. Statements on this page were supplied by the candidates
and have not been checked for accuracy. Each statement was voluntarily submitted by the candidate and is printed at the expense
of the candidate. Candidates who did not submit statements could otherwise be qualified to appear on the ballot.

102 | Candidate Statements

Secretary of State

• As the state’s chief elections officer, administers and enforces election laws and keeps records of all campaign
and lobbyist disclosure statements required under the Political Reform Act.

• Files official documents relating to corporations, trademarks, the Uniform Commercial Code, notaries public,
and limited partnerships.

• Collects and preserves historically valuable papers and artifacts in the California State Archives.
• Serves as an ex-officio member of the California State World Trade Commission.
Debr a Bowen
Democratic Party

578 Washington Blvd. #409
Marina del Rey, CA 90292

(310) 823-3106
info@debrabowen.com
www.debrabowen.com

California must never be like Florida or Ohio. Election results must be free from doubts about fraud and manipulation. As
Chairwoman of the Senate Elections Committee, I’m fighting to make sure your vote is counted accurately and to end the
domination of big money on elections. Your Secretary of State must bring integrity back to the electoral process. I fought to
require a paper trail for electronic voting machines and to outlaw campaign contributions from voting machine manufacturers.
Since my fi rst day in public office, I’ve refused to accept gifts as an elected official, and I’ve pressed to limit the influence
of special interest money. I’ve written bills requiring clear disclosure about who is paying to put initiative petitions on the
ballot. I wrote the fi rst proposal to allow voters to get vote-by-mail ballots automatically. I’m working to expand the Safe
at Home program in the Secretary of State’s office, which allows victims of domestic violence to keep their abusers from
knowing where they live. I’m a fighter for consumer protection, privacy rights, open government, and choice. I led the nation
by authoring a landmark measure to prevent your Social Security number from misuse and to protect you from identity
theft. Senators Barbara Boxer and Dianne Feinstein, the National Organization for Women-California, California Nurses
Association, California Federation of Teachers, and the Sierra Club have joined together to support me. Please join me in the
fight to clean up campaigns and elections. I respectfully request your vote.
Margie Akin
Peace and Freedom Party

20212 Harvard Way
Riverside, CA 92507

(951) 787-0318
margieakin@hotmail.com
www.akin2006.com

New technology should help provide better services for voters and improve voter turnout to strengthen democracy. Instead we
get insecure and faulty voting systems. We need to end corruption and corporate influence throughout the election process.
Forrest Hill
Green Party

815 Washington Street, Suite 24
Oakland, CA 94607

(415) 839-7300
forrest@VoteForrest.org
www.VoteForrest.org

California’s electoral system needs a complete overhaul, not bandages! We must end gerrymandering and ensure all citizens
are fully represented in government; Give citizens more choices with Instant Runoff Voting; Demand all votes are accurately
counted and voting machines produce voter verified paper ballots; Increase voter turnout by allowing election day registration;
End corruption by enacting new restrictions on all election-related contributions and implementing fair public fi nancing
laws.—I am a Financial Advisor with a Ph.D. from MIT in Marine Biology. I have the qualifications to fix our system and
bring Free and Fair elections to California.

The order of the candidates is determined by random alphabet drawing. Statements on this page were supplied by the candidates
and have not been checked for accuracy. Each statement was voluntarily submitted by the candidate and is printed at the expense
of the candidate. Candidates who did not submit statements could otherwise be qualified to appear on the ballot.

Candidate Statements | 103

Secretary of State
(Continued)
Bruce MCPherson
Republican Party

925 University Ave.
Sacramento, CA 95825

www.mcpherson2006.com

In 2005, I was nominated to be Secretary of State by the Governor and unanimously confirmed by every Democrat and
Republican in the Legislature. I have brought nonpartisanship to the Office, restored confidence in our elections process, and
overseen two successful statewide elections. My most important mission is to preserve our basic freedom—the right to vote.
When I became Secretary of State, the Office was in political, economic, and structural disarray. California was unprepared
to comply with new federal voting requirements. I’ve worked tirelessly to bring integrity to the Office. I traveled to each of
California’s 58 counties and met with every elections official to effectively administer elections. Within weeks, I restored $169
million in federal elections funds that had been frozen for nine months. California now leads the nation in modernizing voting
technology with a voter registration database that reduces the potential for fraud. I’ve fought for campaign finance reform and
support immediate public Internet disclosure of campaign contributions. To make the Office more efficient and responsive,
we encourage people to do business online rather than in line. I have worked to improve California’s international trade
opportunities so California remains the 6th largest economy in the world. My positive record speaks for itself. I’m proud to be
supported by the California Teachers Association, California Sheriffs Association, California Women’s Leadership Association,
California Small Business Association, California Farm Bureau, and a bipartisan group of elected officials. I respectfully
request your vote for Secretary of State. Please visit www.mcpherson2006.com.
Glenn MCMillon, Jr.
American Independent Party

14400 E. 14th St., Apt. 11
San Leandro, CA 94578

(510) 483-2845
mcmillon@alum.mit.edu
www.aipca.org

Pro-Life. Pro-Family. Pro-Enforcement. www.myspace.com/mcmillon2006. www.aipca.org.
Gail K. Lightfoot
Libertarian Party

P.O. Box 598
Pismo Beach, CA 93448

(877) 616-1776
SOSVoteLP@aol.com
www.smartvoter.org

FULLY INFORM VOTERS.

The order of the candidates is determined by random alphabet drawing. Statements on this page were supplied by the candidates
and have not been checked for accuracy. Each statement was voluntarily submitted by the candidate and is printed at the expense
of the candidate. Candidates who did not submit statements could otherwise be qualified to appear on the ballot.

104 | Candidate Statements

Controller

• As the state’s chief fiscal officer, acts as the state’s accountant and bookkeeper of all public funds.
• Administers the state payroll system and unclaimed property laws.
• Serves on numerous boards and commissions including the Board of Equalization and the Board of Control.
• Conducts audits and reviews of state operations.
Tony Strickland
Republican Party

P.O. Box 1371
Thousand Oaks, CA 91358

(805) 297-4529
tony@tonystrickland.com
www.tonystrickland.com

The politicians are arguing about raising taxes, but I’m going to tell you the secret they don’t want you to know. If we cut
the waste, fraud, and corruption out of the bureaucracy—and required those applying for state programs to provide proof of
citizenship—we could balance our budget, fix our roads, protect our neighborhoods, and pay our teachers what they deserve,
without raising taxes. As your Controller, I’ll audit the bloated LA Unified School District, and I’ll see to it that students
are learning to read, write, and speak English. Am I willing to fight for you? Absolutely. During the energy crisis, when the
politicians were afraid to rock the boat, I sued Gray Davis over his secret contracts with the energy companies—and won. I’ve
led the battle to eliminate the double taxation on gasoline. And when others were going along with multi-billion dollar budget
deficits, I led the fight to restore accountability and common sense. I am endorsed by California’s major taxpayer organizations
because they know that I won’t back down when your tax dollars are at stake. Waste hurts us all. It robs our classrooms,
shortchanges our teachers, and leaves us all stranded in traffic. As your Controller, I’ll take on the bureaucracy in every area
of government, from welfare to the DMV to our public health system. You work hard for your money, and you have a right to
have your tax dollars spent honestly. You can help by visiting www.TonyStrickland.com.
Laur a Wells
Green Party

P.O. Box 16025
Oakland, CA 94610

info@LauraWells.org
www.LauraWells.org

I now see more hope for California than I have for a long time. I see many people fed up and turning to positive action. As my
contribution, I would like to serve as your State Controller. The Controller is the state’s bookkeeper, the one who reports to
the citizens who elected her exactly how their money is being managed. My over 20 years in financial systems—investments,
pension funds, union dues accounting, real estate loans—prepare me for the job. My lifelong commitment to saner ways of
living prepares me to ensure that California’s budget is in line with California’s values. Imagine a Controller who understands
that a great environment and great economy work together, not in opposition. A Green Controller understands that crime
prevention not only keeps the public safer than ever-expanding prisons, it also saves money we can use toward regaining
our world-class educational system. In healthcare we can shift from exorbitant administrative costs, and worse and worse
healthcare for fewer people, to healthcare for all at less cost. I support electoral reform, including ranked choice voting (instant
runoff), to open up our elections, improve our democracy, and lower costs. For details of why I have hope, please see my
website www.laurawells.org. This year, join the momentum toward real change.

The order of the candidates is determined by random alphabet drawing. Statements on this page were supplied by the candidates
and have not been checked for accuracy. Each statement was voluntarily submitted by the candidate and is printed at the expense
of the candidate. Candidates who did not submit statements could otherwise be qualified to appear on the ballot.

Candidate Statements | 105

Controller
(Continued)
John Chiang
Democratic Party

600 Playhouse Alley #504
Pasadena, CA 91101

(626) 535-9616
info@chiangforcalifornia.com
www.chiangforcalifornia.com

California needs a Controller to slam shut corporate tax loopholes and insist that the oil and insurance companies pay their
fair share. California needs a Controller to simplify taxes for middle class families and make it easy to calculate and pay taxes
online. California needs a Controller to ensure our schools have the resources to prepare our children for a more competitive
world. That’s why I am running for State Controller. For 20 years I have fought for fair state tax and sound fiscal policies. After
graduating with a degree in Finance and then a Law Degree from Georgetown, I worked as a policy advisor to the California
State Controller’s office. As a member and chair of the Board of Equalization and the State Franchise Tax Board I am a strong
voice for taxpaying families and small businesses. I use my tax policy expertise to stand up to corporate lawyers and demand
an end to special interest tax giveaways. I know how to audit and expose wasteful government spending to ensure our tax
money is spent on vital services. The San Francisco Chronicle said that my experience gives me “a solid foundation to become
what is essentially the state’s chief financial officer.” The Sacramento Bee called me “one of the finest young prospects the
Democratic Party has produced in recent years.” I will fight for full funding for quality schools. That’s why I am endorsed by
California’s classroom teachers. For more information: www.ChiangforCalifornia.com
Elizabeth Cervantes Barrón 1720 Main Street
Venice, CA 90291
Peace and Freedom Party

(951) 787-0318
ebtlaloc@aol.com
www.pfpboe.org

Raise taxes on the rich; lower taxes on workers.
Donna Tello
Libertarian Party

13446 Poway Road #202
Poway, CA 92064

donnatello4cacontroller@cox.net
www.donnatello.da.ru

Control spending, not people. Protect taxpayers, not special interests.

The order of the candidates is determined by random alphabet drawing. Statements on this page were supplied by the candidates
and have not been checked for accuracy. Each statement was voluntarily submitted by the candidate and is printed at the expense
of the candidate. Candidates who did not submit statements could otherwise be qualified to appear on the ballot.

106 | Candidate Statements

Treasurer

• As the state’s banker, manages the state’s investments.
• Administers the sale of state bonds and notes and is the investment officer for most state funds.
• Chairs or serves on several commissions, most of which relate to the marketing of bonds.
• Pays out state funds when spent by the Controller and other state agencies.
Marian Smithson
Libertarian Party

(626) 919-1593
mariansway@earthlink.net

California needs leadership with fiscal responsibility. Vote NO on bond measures.
Claude Parrish
Republican Party

P.O. Box 2427
Palos Verdes, CA 90274

(213) 688-8862
parrishfortreasurer@gmail.com
www.smartvoter.org/vote/Parrish

State bond interest payments are consuming an ever increasing portion of the state’s budget. This puts pressure on the
Legislature to increase all state taxes. Any increase in Corporate, personal income taxes, or sales taxes will cause a stall in
the California economy and undoubtedly cause businesses to leave the State. The State is already too deep in debt! First, the
State Treasurer must go before the Legislature to oppose all but the most vital or cost effective bond issues! Second, having
held NASD Security licenses has given me an understanding of the fi nancial markets. We need to eliminate dealing with the
“Middle Men” from “Wall Street” that receive hundreds of millions of dollars in underwriting fees and instead have our bonds
underwritten by allocation to California-based brokerage fi rms. Not only will the state save hundreds of millions of dollars,
California will receive taxes from those California-based firms. Third, the Treasurer’s office needs to be accessible to the
public and run in a cost-effective, efficient manner. Here’s why. For California Citizens, State Bonds are exempt from Federal
and State personal income taxes; however, these bonds are not available to the average California citizen because brokerage
firms do not offer them in amounts of less than $10,000. I will institute a small investor program so that Californians with as
little as $100 can invest in these tax-exempt bonds. I seek your vote and have been endorsed by the Howard Jarvis Taxpayer
Organization and many leading state legislators.
Mehul M. Thakker
Green Party

815 Washington St. #52
Oakland, CA 94607

mehul@votethakker.com
http://www.VoteThakker.com

Corporate money should not buy political influence, so I don’t take contributions from big business! We should protect our
State pensions and invest our tax dollars to fund better schools, universal healthcare, more affordable housing, community
development, and clean energy programs. We should forgive student loans so education becomes a benefit and not a burden.
Banks that hold California’s money should stop predatory and environmentally destructive lending, and we should move
our State’s investments into community development banks and credit unions that support local economies. We can balance
California’s budget immediately if the top 1% of earners pay the same local and state tax rates as the poorest citizens in
California. We must implement a fair policy of legalization for undocumented workers and ensure that all workers are paid
a fair minimum wage, with inflation protection.—I believe our competitiveness in the world economy and ability to foster
peace globally depends on our ability to chart a new course. Vote Thakker, and help me work for economic justice for all
Californians.

The order of the candidates is determined by random alphabet drawing. Statements on this page were supplied by the candidates
and have not been checked for accuracy. Each statement was voluntarily submitted by the candidate and is printed at the expense
of the candidate. Candidates who did not submit statements could otherwise be qualified to appear on the ballot.

Candidate Statements | 107

Attorney General

• As the state’s chief law officer, ensures that the laws of the state are uniformly and adequately enforced.
• Heads the Department of Justice, which is responsible for providing state legal services and support for local law
enforcement.

• Acts as the chief counsel in state litigation.
• Oversees law enforcement agencies, including District Attorneys and Sheriffs.
Michael S. W yman
Green Party

P.O. Box 9380
San Rafael, CA 94912

(415) 785-3448
vote4mike@comcast.net
www.votewyman.org

Most Californians prefer life imprisonment without parole to the death penalty. Most Californians oppose lengthy prison
sentences for nonviolent offenders. Most Californians agree that the War on Drugs has been a complete failure. Most
Californians think that their police have better things to do than arrest the terminally ill for using medical marijuana. Most
Californians don’t believe they should be spied upon by their own government. Most Californians want equal rights for
immigrants, including the right to live and work here in America in peace. I agree with them. We need to put the justice back
in the justice system. We do this by enforcing laws humanely and challenging the laws and policies that deny the people of
California their rights. We need an attorney general who defends the people of California as energetically as we prosecute the
violent offender. I will be that kind of Attorney General. I ask for your support. Thank You.
Kenneth A. Weissman
Libertarian Party

8484 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 850
Beverly Hills, CA 90211-3222

(323) 655-4529
CalAG2006@yahoo.com
www.ElectKenWeissman.com

I will fight for your rights. Absolutist on Second Amendment. Secure our borders NOW.
Jack Harrison
Peace and Freedom Party

1312 Cornell Ave.
Berkeley, CA 94702

(510) 527-9584
JackLHa@Pacbell.net
www.jackharrison.org

Abolish the inhumane death penalty. Decriminalize marijuana. Expand parole and diversion services. Eliminate the disastrous
“three strikes” sentencing. Use State funds for people’s needs. Prosecute the corporate criminals and those who defile our
environment.

The order of the candidates is determined by random alphabet drawing. Statements on this page were supplied by the candidates
and have not been checked for accuracy. Each statement was voluntarily submitted by the candidate and is printed at the expense
of the candidate. Candidates who did not submit statements could otherwise be qualified to appear on the ballot.

108 | Candidate Statements

Insurance Commissioner

• Oversees and directs all functions of the Department of Insurance.
• Licenses, regulates, and examines insurance companies.
• Answers public questions and complaints regarding the insurance industry.
• Enforces the laws of the California Insurance Code and adopts regulations to implement the laws.
Tom Condit
Peace and Freedom Party

2124 Kittredge St. #174
Berkeley, CA 94704

(510) 845-4360
condit@peaceandfreedom.org
www.tomcondit.org

Insurance company profits soar, but millions don’t have health care or real protection against accident and disaster. While
insurance companies pour money into “tort reform” schemes to deprive ordinary people of legal assistance, they spend billions
on their own lawyers to evade paying claims. The bipartisan “reforms” of workers’ compensation let insurance companies
endlessly delay needed medical treatment for injured workers by second-guessing doctors and pharmacists. They make more
in profits on workers’ compensation than they pay for medical care. I advocate putting human need before insurance company
profits. Let’s publicly fund and manage a single system of quality health care for all, a state basic auto liability plan, and a
single workers’ compensation fund—all without insurance company profits, lawyers, or red tape. I will fight discrimination
based on race, sex, age, or geography.
Larry Cafiero
Green Party

P.O. Box 203
Ben Lomond, CA 95005-0203

(831) 438-1401
larry4inscomm@earthlink.net
http://www.votecafiero.com

Candidate statements, once free, now cost $20 per word. Fight pay-to-play government—Vote Green. My statement:
http://www.votecafiero.com/statement

The order of the candidates is determined by random alphabet drawing. Statements on this page were supplied by the candidates
and have not been checked for accuracy. Each statement was voluntarily submitted by the candidate and is printed at the expense
of the candidate. Candidates who did not submit statements could otherwise be qualified to appear on the ballot.

Candidate Statements | 109

Board of Equalization

Serves on the Board of Equalization, California’s elected tax commission, a body that:

• Oversees the administration of over two dozen tax and fee programs including sales and use, cigarette and
tobacco, alcohol, and fuels tax.

• Serves as the appellate body for California income and franchise tax cases.
• Oversees the administration of property tax statewide.
DISTRICT 1
Betty T. Yee
Democratic Party

601 Van Ness Avenue #E3-438
San Francisco, CA 94102

www.BettyYee2006.com

All Californians deserve to be treated fairly by their government. During the time I have served on the Board of Equalization,
my actions and votes on all tax matters that have come before the Board demonstrate a strong commitment to fairness
and honesty. My experience in making careful decisions with your tax dollars, my strong sense of fairness in interpreting
California’s tax laws, and my unblemished record of integrity and honesty make me your best choice to continue serving
and providing leadership as the First District Member on the Board of Equalization. I will oppose special tax breaks for the
wealthy. I will be a voice for all working persons. As your guardian of the state’s revenues, my objective is to ensure California
has the resources needed to provide a bright future and opportunities for all of us and for generations to come—this means
quality schools in every community, access to health care for every Californian, a pristine natural environment, affordable
housing, adequate transportation systems, and safe neighborhoods. I am proud to have earned the endorsements of a broad
array of organizations that represent the interests of teachers, nurses, fi refighters, peace officers, workers, women, students,
and taxpayers—all of whom recognize my financial expertise and commitment to protecting the interests of hardworking
Californians. I would be honored to continue serving you on the Board of Equalization.

DISTRICT 2
Bill Leonard
Republican Party

P.O. Box 277090
Sacramento, CA 95827

(916) 441-1043 Ext. 2
leonard@billleonard.org
www.billleonard.org

California is a terrific place to live, but we need leaders who are not afraid to stand up and fight for the rights of taxpayers.
As a Member of the State Board of Equalization—the only elected office in America with the job of protecting the rights of
taxpayers—I have worked hard to hold government accountable. The State Board of Equalization is an independently elected
tax panel that makes the fi nal decision in disputes between taxpayers and government bureaucrats. Taxpayers deserve to have
an advocate fighting for their interests—and that is what I have done as a Member of the State Board of Equalization. Illegal
immigrants are among those who do not pay their fair share of taxes yet get their full share of government benefits. Not enough
is being done to make sure that illegal aliens pay all the taxes they owe. It is not fair that law-abiding California families and
business owners have to pay all their taxes and still get hit by government investigators when they are trying to comply with
California’s complex and excessive tax laws while illegal immigration laws go unenforced. We can do better. Please visit
my website (www.billleonard.org) to learn more about the State Board of Equalization and my record as an advocate for
taxpayers. I will continue to do all I can to make sure government is held accountable for how it spends your hard-earned tax
dollars. I would be honored to have your vote on November 7th.

The order of the candidates is determined by random alphabet drawing. Statements on this page were supplied by the candidates
and have not been checked for accuracy. Each statement was voluntarily submitted by the candidate and is printed at the expense
of the candidate. Candidates who did not submit statements could otherwise be qualified to appear on the ballot.

110 | Candidate Statements

Board of Equalization
(Continued)
DISTRICT 2 (continued)
Tim R aboy
Democratic Party

P.O. Box 132
Galt, CA 95632

(209) 251-9695
info@timraboy.com
www.timraboy.com

I am a Supervising Investigator for the Board of Equalization (BOE), Investigations Division, fourteen-year BOE employee,
and an Elected City Councilmember. Please visit www.timraboy.com.

DISTRICT 3
Michelle Steel
Republican Party

27520 Hawthorne Blvd. #270
Palos Verdes, CA 90274

(310) 971-5865
info@steelforboe.com
www.steelforboe.com

As a fiscal conservative, I have been proud to serve as Chief Deputy to our current Member of the Board of Equalization. Now
that the incumbent is retiring, it is vital that taxpayers have another fiscal watchdog to take his place. I will work to simplify
tax rules so that businesses and individuals will not be constantly victimized by a bureaucracy that frequently oversteps its
authority. As a rock-solid fiscal conservative, I will be the Taxpayer’s Advocate against the bureaucracy. And, believe me, we
need voices to speak out and defend taxpayers! I have witnessed fi rsthand how the taxing agencies assume taxpayers are guilty
until proven innocent. And, I believe that approach is un-American. My philosophy is that every hearing should begin with
the presumption that the taxpayer is innocent. As a businesswoman, wife, and mother, I know how tough it can be to make
ends meet. I believe the hardworking families of California deserve an Advocate who will stand with them against abusive
government bureaucracies. As a board member of the California World Trade Commission, I also became convinced that
our high California taxes are harming our competitiveness in the world economy. I am an experienced, fiscally conservative
professional who will not need on-the-job training, because I’ve already been on the job defending taxpayers. I would be
honored to have your support. For any questions, please contact me at www.steelforboe.com.

DISTRICT 4
Glen Forsch
Republican Party

2806 Scott Road
Burbank, CA 91504

(818) 415-1199
GlenForsch2000@aol.com
www.GlenForschForBOE.com

Hi, I’m Glen Forsch. I am running for the Board of Equalization, Fourth District. I know how difficult it is to earn a living
and pay our bills in California. I know it’s a great RESPONSIBILITY TO COLLECT THE TAXPAYER’S MONEY. I join
all REPUBLICANS, DEMOCRATS, INDEPENDENTS, AND ALL OTHER PARTIES, who want California TAXPAYERS
and BUSINESSES to be Treated Fairly. I will do what it takes to get rid of the INHERITANCE TAX. I do not want the State
Government to Tax and Take Your Inheritance. I will not stand by and let you, your parents, or your children be TAXED INTO
POVERTY. Gather your Family, Friends, and Neighbors to VOTE FOR GLEN FORSCH.

The order of the candidates is determined by random alphabet drawing. Statements on this page were supplied by the candidates
and have not been checked for accuracy. Each statement was voluntarily submitted by the candidate and is printed at the expense
of the candidate. Candidates who did not submit statements could otherwise be qualified to appear on the ballot.

Candidate Statements | 111

Board of Equalization Districts by county

Board of Equalization, District 1
Alameda, Colusa, Contra Costa, Del Norte, Humboldt, Lake,
Marin, Mendocino, Monterey, Napa, San Benito, San Francisco,
San Luis Obispo, San Mateo, Santa Barbara, Santa Clara,
Santa Cruz, Solano, Sonoma, Trinity, and Yolo
Board of Equalization, District 2
Alpine, Amador, Butte, Calaveras, El Dorado, Fresno,
Glenn, Inyo, Kern, Kings, Lassen, Los Angeles, Madera,
Mariposa, Merced, Modoc, Mono, Nevada, Placer, Plumas,
Sacramento, San Bernardino, San Joaquin, Santa Barbara,
Shasta, Sierra, Siskiyou, Stanislaus, Sutter, Tehama, Tulare,
Tuolumne, Ventura, and Yuba
Board of Equalization, District 3
Imperial, Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside,
San Bernardino, San Diego
Board of Equalization, District 4
Los Angeles

Equalization Districts

District 1
District 2
District 3
District 4

112 | Board of Equalization Districts

justices of the supreme & appellate courts
For more information about the Supreme Court Justices and the Appellate Court Justices, please
visit the Secretary of State’s website at www.voterguide.ss.ca.gov or www.ss.ca.gov or call
our toll-free voter line at 1-800-345-VOTE (8683).
THE ELECTORAL PROCEDURE

Under the California Constitution, justices of the Supreme Court and the courts of appeal are
subject to confirmation by the voters. The public votes “yes” or “no” on whether to retain each
justice.
These judicial offices are nonpartisan.
Before a person can become an appellate justice, the Governor must submit the candidate’s
name to the Judicial Nominees Evaluation Commission, which is comprised of public members
and lawyers. The commission conducts a thorough review of the candidate’s background and
qualifications, with community input, and then forwards its evaluation of the candidate to the
Governor.
The Governor then reviews the commission’s evaluation and officially nominates the
candidate, whose qualifications are subject to public comment before examination and
review by the Commission on Judicial Appointments. That commission consists of the Chief
Justice of California, the Attorney General of California, and a senior Presiding Justice of the
Courts of Appeal. The Commission on Judicial Appointments must then confirm or reject the
nomination. Only if confirmed does the nominee become a justice.
Following confirmation, the justice is sworn into office and is subject to voter approval at the
next gubernatorial election, and thereafter at the conclusion of each term. The term prescribed
by the California Constitution for justices of the Supreme Court and courts of appeal is 12
years. Justices are confirmed by the Commission on Judicial Appointments only until the next
gubernatorial election, at which time they run for retention of the remainder of the term, if
any, of their predecessor, which will be either four or eight years.
(Elections Code Section 9083.)

Justices of the Supreme & Appellate Courts | 113

text of proposed laws

1A
1B

PROPOSITION 1A
This amendment proposed by Senate Constitutional Amendment
7 of the 2005–2006 Regular Session (Resolution Chapter 49, Statutes of
2006) expressly amends the California Constitution by amending a section
thereof; therefore, existing provisions proposed to be deleted are printed
in strikeout type and new provisions proposed to be added are printed in
italic type to indicate that they are new.
PROPOSED AMENDMENT TO SECTION 1 OF
ARTICLE XIX B
SECTION 1. (a) For the 2003–04 fiscal year and each fiscal year
thereafter, all moneys that are collected during the fiscal year from taxes
under the Sales and Use Tax Law (Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001)
of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code), or any successor to
that law, upon the sale, storage, use, or other consumption in this State of
motor vehicle fuel, and that are deposited in the General Fund of the State
pursuant to that law, shall be transferred to the Transportation Investment
Fund, which is hereby created in the State Treasury.
(b) (l) For the 2003–04 to 2007–08 fiscal years, inclusive, moneys in
the Transportation Investment Fund shall be allocated, upon appropriation
by the Legislature, in accordance with Section 7104 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code as that section read on the operative date of this article
March 6, 2002.
(2) For the 2008–09 fiscal year and each fiscal year thereafter,
moneys in the Transportation Investment Fund shall be allocated solely for
the following purposes:
(A) Public transit and mass transportation.
(B) Transportation capital improvement projects, subject to the
laws governing the State Transportation Improvement Program, or any
successor to that program.
(C) Street and highway maintenance, rehabilitation, reconstruction,
or storm damage repair conducted by cities, including a city and county.
(D) Street and highway maintenance, rehabilitation, reconstruction,
or storm damage repair conducted by counties, including a city and county.
(c) For the 2008–09 fiscal year and each fiscal year thereafter,
moneys in the Transportation Investment Fund shall be allocated, upon
appropriation by the Legislature, as follows:
(A) Twenty percent of the moneys for the purposes set forth in
subparagraph (A) of paragraph (2) of subdivision (b).
(B) Forty percent of the moneys for the purposes set forth in
subparagraph (B) of paragraph (2) of subdivision (b).
(C) Twenty percent of the moneys for the purposes set forth in
subparagraph (C) of paragraph (2) of subdivision (b).
(D) Twenty percent of the moneys for the purpose purposes set forth
in subparagraph (D) of paragraph (2) of subdivision (b).
(d) The (1) Except as otherwise provided by paragraph (2), the
transfer of revenues from the General Fund of the State to the Transportation
Investment Fund pursuant to subdivision (a) may be suspended, in whole
or in part, for a fiscal year if both all of the following conditions are met:
(l) (A) The Governor has issued issues a proclamation that declares
that, due to a severe state fiscal hardship, the suspension of the transfer of
revenues pursuant to required by subdivision (a) will result in a significant
negative fiscal impact on the range of functions of government funded by
the General Fund of the State is necessary.
(2) (B) The Legislature enacts by statute, pursuant to a bill passed
in each house of the Legislature by rollcall vote entered in the journal, twothirds of the membership concurring, a suspension for that fiscal year of
the transfer of revenues pursuant to required by subdivision (a), provided
that and the bill does not contain any other unrelated provision.
(C) No later than the effective date of the statute described in
subparagraph (B), a separate statute is enacted that provides for the full
repayment to the Transportation Investment Fund of the total amount of
revenue that was not transferred to that fund as a result of the suspension,
including interest as provided by law. This full repayment shall be made
not later than the end of the third fiscal year immediately following the
fiscal year to which the suspension applies.
(2) (A) The transfer required by subdivision (a) shall not be suspended

114 | Text of Proposed Laws

for more than two fiscal years during any period of 10 consecutive fiscal
years, which period begins with the first fiscal year commencing on or
after July 1, 2007, for which the transfer required by subdivision (a) is
suspended.
(B) The transfer required by subdivision (a) shall not be suspended
during any fiscal year if a full repayment required by a statute enacted
in accordance with subparagraph (C) of paragraph (1) has not yet been
completed.
(e) The Legislature may enact a statute that modifies the percentage
shares set forth in subdivision (c) by a bill passed in each house of the
Legislature by rollcall vote entered in the journal, two-thirds of the
membership concurring, provided that the bill does not contain any other
unrelated provision and that the moneys described in subdivision (a) are
expended solely for the purposes set forth in paragraph (2) of subdivision (b).
(f) (1) An amount equivalent to the total amount of revenues that were
not transferred from the General Fund of the State to the Transportation
Investment Fund, as of July 1, 2007, because of a suspension of transfer
of revenues pursuant to this section as it read on January 1, 2006, but
excluding the amount to be paid to the Transportation Deferred Investment
Fund pursuant to Section 63048.65 of the Government Code, shall be
transferred from the General Fund to the Transportation Investment Fund
no later than June 30, 2016. Until this total amount has been transferred,
the amount of transfer payments to be made in each fiscal year shall not
be less than one-tenth of the total amount required to be transferred by
June 30, 2016. The transferred revenues shall be allocated solely for the
purposes set forth in this section as if they had been received in the absence
of a suspension of transfer of revenues.
(2) The Legislature may provide by statute for the issuance of
bonds by the state or local agencies, as applicable, that are secured by
the minimum transfer payments required by paragraph (1). Proceeds from
the sale of those bonds shall be allocated solely for the purposes set forth
in this section as if they were revenues subject to allocation pursuant to
paragraph (2) of subdivision (b).

PROPOSITION 1B
This law proposed by Senate Bill 1266 of the 2005–2006 Regular
Session (Chapter 25, Statutes of 2006) is submitted to the people
in accordance with the provisions of Article XVI of the California
Constitution.
This proposed law adds sections to the Government Code; therefore,
new provisions proposed to be added are printed in italic type to indicate
that they are new.
PROPOSED LAW
SECTION 1. Chapter 12.49 (commencing with Section 8879.20) is
added to Division 1 of Title 2 of the Government Code, to read:

CHAPTER 12.49. THE HIGHWAY SAFETY, TRAFFIC REDUCTION,
AIR QUALITY, AND PORT SECURITY BOND ACT OF 2006
Article 1.

General Provisions

8879.20. (a) This chapter shall be known as the Highway Safety,
Traffic Reduction, Air Quality, and Port Security Bond Act of 2006.
(b) This chapter shall only become operative upon adoption by the
voters at the November 7, 2006, statewide general election.
8879.22. As used in this chapter, the following terms have the
following meanings:
(a) “Board” means any department receiving an allocation of bond
proceeds pursuant to this chapter.
(b) “Committee” means the Highway Safety, Traffic Reduction,
Air Quality, and Port Security Committee created pursuant to
Section 8879.27.
(c) “Fund” means the Highway Safety, Traffic Reduction, Air Quality,
and Port Security Fund of 2006 created pursuant to Section 8879.23.
Article 2. Highway Safety, Traffic Reduction, Air Quality, and Port
Security Fund of 2006 and Program

(PROPOSITION 1B CONTINUED)

8879.23. The Highway Safety, Traffic Reduction, Air Quality, and
Port Security Fund of 2006 is hereby created in the State Treasury. The
Legislature intends that the proceeds of bonds deposited in the fund shall
be used to fund the mobility, safety, and air quality improvements described
in this article over the course of the next decade. The proceeds of bonds
issued and sold pursuant to this chapter for the purposes specified in this
chapter shall be allocated in the following manner:
(a) (1) Four billion five hundred million dollars ($4,500,000,000)
shall be deposited in the Corridor Mobility Improvement Account, which
is hereby created in the fund. Funds in the account shall be available to
the California Transportation Commission, upon appropriation in the
annual Budget Bill by the Legislature, for allocation for performance
improvements on highly congested travel corridors in California. Funds
in the account shall be used for performance improvements on the state
highway system, or major access routes to the state highway system on
the local road system that relieve congestion by expanding capacity,
enhancing operations, or otherwise improving travel times within these
high-congestion travel corridors, as identified by the department and
regional or local transportation agencies, pursuant to the process in
paragraph (3) or (4), as applicable.
(2) The commission shall develop and adopt guidelines, by December
1, 2006, including regional programming targets, for the program funded
by this subdivision, and shall allocate funds from the account to projects
after reviewing project nominations submitted by the Department of
Transportation and by regional transportation planning agencies or county
transportation commissions or authorities pursuant to paragraph (4).
(3) Subject to the guidelines adopted pursuant to paragraph (2), the
department shall nominate, by no later than January 15, 2007, projects
for the allocation of funds from the account on a statewide basis. The
department’s nominations shall be geographically balanced and shall
reflect the department’s assessment of a program that best meets the policy
objectives described in paragraph (1).
(4) Subject to the guidelines adopted pursuant to paragraph (2),
a regional transportation planning agency or county transportation
commission or authority responsible for preparing a regional
transportation improvement plan under Section 14527 may nominate
projects identified pursuant to paragraph (1) that best meet the policy
objectives described in that paragraph for funding from the account. Projects
nominated pursuant to this paragraph shall be submitted to the commission
for consideration for funding by no later than January 15, 2007.
(5) All nominations to the California Transportation Commission
shall be accompanied by documentation regarding the quantitative and
qualitative measures validating each project’s consistency with the policy
objectives described in paragraph (1). All projects nominated to the
commission for funds from this account shall be included in a regional
transportation plan.
(6) After review of the project nominations, and supporting
documentation, the commission, by no later than March 1, 2007, shall
adopt an initial program of projects to be funded from the account. This
program may be updated every two years in conjunction with the biennial
process for adoption of the state transportation improvement program
pursuant to guidelines adopted by the commission. The inclusion of a
project in the program shall be based on a demonstration that the project
meets all of the following criteria:
(A) Is a high-priority project in the corridor as demonstrated by
either of the following: (i) its inclusion in the list of nominated projects
by both the department pursuant to paragraph (3) and the regional
transportation planning agency or county transportation commission or
authority, pursuant to paragraph (4); or (ii) if needed to fully fund the
project, the identification and commitment of supplemental funding to the
project from other state, local, or federal funds.
(B) Can commence construction or implementation no later than
December 31, 2012.
(C) Improves mobility in a high-congestion corridor by improving
travel times or reducing the number of daily vehicle hours of delay,
improves the connectivity of the state highway system between rural,
suburban, and urban areas, or improves the operation or safety of a
highway or road segment.
(D) Improves access to jobs, housing, markets, and commerce.
(7) Where competing projects offer similar mobility improvements to
a specific corridor, the commission shall consider additional benefits when

text of proposed laws
determining which project shall be included in the program for funding.
These benefits shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
(A) A finding that the project provides quantifiable air quality
benefits.
(B) A finding that the project substantially increases the safety for
travelers in the corridor.
(8) In adopting a program for funding pursuant to this subdivision,
the commission shall make a finding that the program is (i) geographically
balanced, consistent with the geographic split for funding described
in Section 188 of the Streets and Highways Code; (ii) provides mobility
improvements in highly traveled or highly congested corridors in all
regions of California; and (iii) targets bond proceeds in a manner that
provides the increment of funding necessary, when combined with other
state, local or federal funds, to provide the mobility benefit in the earliest
possible timeframe.
(9) The commission shall include in its annual report to the
Legislature, required by Section 14535, a summary of its activities related
to the administration of this program. The summary should, at a minimum,
include a description and the location of the projects contained in the
program, the amount of funds allocated to each project, the status of each
project, and a description of the mobility improvements the program is
achieving.
(b) One billion dollars ($1,000,000,000) shall be made available,
upon appropriation in the annual Budget Bill by the Legislature, to
the department for improvements to State Route 99. Funds may be
used for safety, operational enhancements, rehabilitation, or capacity
improvements necessary to improve the State Route 99 corridor traversing
approximately 400 miles of the central valley of this state.
(c) Three billion one hundred million dollars ($3,100,000,000)
shall be deposited in the California Ports Infrastructure, Security, and
Air Quality Improvement Account, which is hereby created in the fund.
The money in the account shall be available, upon appropriation by the
Legislature and subject to such conditions and criteria as the Legislature
may provide by statute, as follows:
(1) (A) Two billion dollars ($2,000,000,000) shall be transferred
to the Trade Corridors Improvement Fund, which is hereby created. The
money in this fund shall be available, upon appropriation in the annual
Budget Bill by the Legislature and subject to such conditions and criteria
as the Legislature may provide by statute, for allocation by the California
Transportation Commission for infrastructure improvements along
federally designated “Trade Corridors of National Significance” in this
state or along other corridors within this state that have a high volume
of freight movement, as determined by the commission. In determining
projects eligible for funding, the commission shall consult the trade
infrastructure and goods movement plan submitted to the commission
by the Secretary of Business, Transportation and Housing and the
Secretary for Environmental Protection. No moneys shall be allocated
from this fund until the report is submitted to the commission for its
consideration, provided the report is submitted no later than January 1,
2007. The commission shall also consult trade infrastructure and goods
movement plans adopted by regional transportation planning agencies,
adopted regional transportation plans required by state and federal law,
and the statewide port master plan prepared by the California Marine
and Intermodal Transportation System Advisory Council (Cal-MITSAC)
pursuant to Section 1760 of the Harbors and Navigation Code, when
determining eligible projects for funding. Eligible projects for these funds
include, but are not limited to, all of the following:
(i) Highway capacity improvements and operational improvements
to more efficiently accommodate the movement of freight, particularly for
ingress and egress to and from the state’s seaports, including navigable
inland waterways used to transport freight between seaports, land ports of
entry, and airports, and to relieve traffic congestion along major trade or
goods movement corridors.
(ii) Freight rail system improvements to enhance the ability to move
goods from seaports, land ports of entry, and airports to warehousing and
distribution centers throughout California, including projects that separate
rail lines from highway or local road traffic, improve freight rail mobility
through mountainous regions, relocate rail switching yards, and other

Text of Proposed Laws | 115

1B

text of proposed laws

1B

projects that improve the efficiency and capacity of the rail freight system.
(iii) Projects to enhance the capacity and efficiency of ports.
(iv) Truck corridor improvements, including dedicated truck
facilities or truck toll facilities.
(v) Border access improvements that enhance goods movement
between California and Mexico and that maximize the state’s ability to
access coordinated border infrastructure funds made available to the
state by federal law.
(vi) Surface transportation improvements to facilitate the movement
of goods to and from the state’s airports.
(B) The commission shall allocate funds for trade infrastructure
improvements from the account in a manner that (i) addresses the state’s
most urgent needs, (ii) balances the demands of various ports (between
large and small ports, as well as between seaports, airports, and land
ports of entry), (iii) provides reasonable geographic balance between the
state’s regions, and (iv) places emphasis on projects that improve trade
corridor mobility while reducing emissions of diesel particulate and other
pollutant emissions. In addition, the commission shall also consider the
following factors when allocating these funds:
(i) “Velocity,” which means the speed by which large cargo would
travel from the port through the distribution system.
(ii) “Throughput,” which means the volume of cargo that would
move from the port through the distribution system.
(iii) “Reliability,” which means a reasonably consistent and
predictable amount of time for cargo to travel from one point to another
on any given day or at any given time in California.
(iv) “Congestion reduction,” which means the reduction in
recurrent daily hours of delay to be achieved.
(C) The commission shall allocate funds made available by this
paragraph to projects that have identified and committed supplemental
funding from appropriate local, federal or private sources. The commission
shall determine the appropriate amount of supplemental funding each
project should have to be eligible for moneys from this fund based on
a project-by-project review and an assessment of the project’s benefit
to the state and the program. Except for border access improvements
described in clause (v) of subparagraph (A), improvements funded with
moneys from this fund shall have supplemental funding that is at least
equal to the amount of the contribution from the fund. The commission
may give priority for funding to projects with higher levels of committed
supplemental funding.
(D) The commission shall include in its annual report to the
Legislature, required by Section 14535, a summary of its activities related
to the administration of this program. The summary should, at a minimum,
include a description and the location of the projects contained in the
program, the amount of funds allocated to each project, the status of each
project, and a description of the mobility and air quality improvements
the program is achieving.
(2) One billion dollars ($1,000,000,000) shall be made available,
upon appropriation by the Legislature and subject to such conditions and
criteria contained in a statute enacted by the Legislature, to the State Air
Resources Board for emission reductions, not otherwise required by law
or regulation, from activities related to the movement of freight along
California’s trade corridors. Funds made available by this paragraph
are intended to supplement existing funds used to finance strategies and
public benefit projects that reduce emissions and improve air quality in
trade corridors commencing at the state’s airports, seaports, and land
ports of entry.
(3) One hundred million dollars ($100,000,000) shall be available,
upon appropriation by the Legislature, to the Office of Emergency
Services to be allocated, as grants, for port, harbor, and ferry terminal
security improvements. Eligible applicants shall be publicly owned
ports, harbors, and ferryboat and ferry terminal operators, which may
submit applications for projects that include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(A) Video surveillance equipment.
(B) Explosives detection technology, including, but not limited to,
X-ray devices.
(C) Cargo scanners.
(D) Radiation monitors.

116 | Text of Proposed Laws

(E) Thermal protective equipment.
(F) Site identification instruments capable of providing a fingerprint
for a broad inventory of chemical agents.
(G) Other devices capable of detecting weapons of mass destruction
using chemical, biological, or other similar substances.
(H) Other security equipment to assist in any of the following:
(i) Screening of incoming vessels, trucks, and incoming or outbound
cargo.
(ii) Monitoring the physical perimeters of harbors, ports, and ferry
terminals.
(iii) Providing or augmenting onsite emergency response
capability.
(I) Overweight cargo detection equipment, including, but not
limited to, intermodal crane scales and truck weight scales.
(J) Developing disaster preparedness or emergency response
plans.
The Office of Emergency Services shall report to the Legislature on
March 1 of each year on the manner in which the funds available pursuant
to this paragraph were expended for that fiscal year.
(d) Two hundred million dollars ($200,000,000) shall be available,
upon appropriation by the Legislature, for schoolbus retrofit and
replacement to reduce air pollution and to reduce children’s exposure to
diesel exhaust.
(e) Two billion dollars ($2,000,000,000) shall be available for
projects in the state transportation improvement program, to augment funds
otherwise available for this purpose from other sources. The funds provided
by this subdivision shall be deposited in the Transportation Facilities
Account which is hereby created in the fund, and shall be available, upon
appropriation by the Legislature, to the Department of Transportation, as
allocated by the California Transportation Commission in the same manner
as funds allocated for those projects under existing law.
(f) (1) Four billion dollars ($4,000,000,000) shall be deposited
in the Public Transportation Modernization, Improvement, and Service
Enhancement Account, which is hereby created in the fund. Funds in the
account shall be made available, upon appropriation by the Legislature,
to the Department of Transportation for intercity rail projects and to
commuter or urban rail operators, bus operators, waterborne transit
operators, and other transit operators in California for rehabilitation,
safety or modernization improvements, capital service enhancements or
expansions, new capital projects, bus rapid transit improvements, or for
rolling stock procurement, rehabilitation, or replacement.
(2) Of the funds made available in paragraph (1), four hundred
million dollars ($400,000,000) shall be available, upon appropriation by
the Legislature, to the department for intercity rail improvements, of which
one hundred twenty-five million dollars ($125,000,000) shall be used for
the procurement of additional intercity railcars and locomotives.
(3) Of the funds remaining after the allocations in paragraph (2),
50 percent shall be distributed to the Controller, for allocation to eligible
agencies using the formula in Section 99314 of the Public Utilities Code,
and 50 percent shall be distributed to the Controller, for allocation to
eligible agencies using the formula in Section 99313 of the Public Utilities
Code, subject to the provisions governing funds allocated under those
sections.
(g) One billion dollars ($1,000,000,000) shall be deposited in the
State-Local Partnership Program Account, which is hereby created in the
fund. The funds shall be available, upon appropriation by the Legislature
and subject to such conditions and criteria as the Legislature may provide
by statute, for allocation by the California Transportation Commission
over a five-year period to eligible transportation projects nominated by an
applicant transportation agency. A dollar for dollar match of local funds
shall be required for an applicant transportation agency to receive state
funds under this program.
(h) One billion dollars ($1,000,000,000) shall be deposited in the
Transit System Safety, Security, and Disaster Response Account, which is
hereby created in the fund. Funds in the account shall be made available,
upon appropriation by the Legislature and subject to such conditions and
criteria as the Legislature may provide by statute, for capital projects
that provide increased protection against a security and safety threat,
and for capital expenditures to increase the capacity of transit operators,
including waterborne transit operators, to develop disaster response

(PROPOSITION 1B CONTINUED)

transportation systems that can move people, goods, and emergency
personnel and equipment in the aftermath of a disaster impairing the
mobility of goods, people, and equipment.
(i) One hundred twenty-five million dollars ($125,000,000) shall
be deposited in the Local Bridge Seismic Retrofit Account, which is
hereby created in the fund. The funds in the account shall be used, upon
appropriation by the Legislature, to provide the 11.5 percent required
match for federal Highway Bridge Replacement and Repair funds available
to the state for seismic work on local bridges, ramps, and overpasses, as
identified by the Department of Transportation.
(j) (1) Two hundred fi fty million dollars ($250,000,000) shall be
deposited in the Highway-Railroad Crossing Safety Account, which is
hereby created in the fund. Funds in the account shall be available, upon
appropriation by the Legislature, to the Department of Transportation for
the completion of high-priority grade separation and railroad crossing
safety improvements. Funds in the account shall be made available for
allocation pursuant to the process established in Chapter 10 (commencing
with Section 2450) of Division 3 of the Streets and Highways Code, except
that a dollar for dollar match of nonstate funds shall be provided for each
project, and the limitation on maximum project cost in subdivision (g) of
Section 2454 of the Streets and Highways Code shall not be applicable to
projects funded with these funds.
(2) Notwithstanding the funding allocation process described in
paragraph (1), in consultation with the department and the Public Utilities
Commission, the California Transportation Commission shall allocate
one hundred million dollars ($100,000,000) of the funds in the account to
high-priority railroad crossing improvements, including grade separation
projects, that are not part of the process established in Chapter 10
(commencing with Section 2450) of Division 3 of the Streets and Highways
Code. The allocation of funds under this paragraph shall be made in
consultation and coordination with the High-Speed Rail Authority created
pursuant to Division 19.5 (commencing with Section 185000) of the Public
Utilities Code.
(k) (1) Seven hundred fi fty million dollars ($750,000,000) shall
be deposited in the Highway Safety, Rehabilitation, and Preservation
Account, which is hereby created in the fund. Funds in the account shall be
available, upon appropriation by the Legislature, to the Department of
Transportation, as allocated by the California Transportation Commission,
for the purposes of the state highway operation and protection program as
described in Section 14526.5.
(2) The department shall develop a program for distribution of two
hundred and fi fty million dollars ($250,000,000) from the funds identified
in paragraph (1) to fund traffic light synchronization projects or other
technology-based improvements to improve safety, operations and the
effective capacity of local streets and roads.
(l) (1) Two billion dollars ($2,000,000,000) shall be deposited in
the Local Streets and Road Improvement, Congestion Relief, and Traffic
Safety Account of 2006, which is hereby created in the fund. The proceeds
of bonds deposited into that account shall be available, upon appropriation
by the Legislature, for the purposes specified in this subdivision to the
Controller for administration and allocation in the fiscal year in which the
bonds are issued and sold, including any interest or other return earned on
the investment of those moneys, in the following manner:
(A) Fifty percent to the counties, including a city and county, in
accordance with the following formulas:
(i) Seventy-five percent of the funds payable under this subparagraph
shall be apportioned among the counties in the proportion that the number
of fee-paid and exempt vehicles that are registered in the county bears to
the number of fee-paid and exempt vehicles registered in the state.
(ii) Twenty-five percent of the funds payable under this subparagraph
shall be apportioned among the counties in the proportion that the number
of miles of maintained county roads in each county bears to the total
number of miles of maintained county roads in the state. For the purposes
of apportioning funds under this clause, any roads within the boundaries
of a city and county that are not state highways shall be deemed to be
county roads.
(B) Fifty percent to the cities, including a city and county,
apportioned among the cities in the proportion that the total population of
the city bears to the total population of all the cities in the state, provided,
however, that the Controller shall allocate a minimum of four hundred
thousand dollars ($400,000) to each city, pursuant to this subparagraph.

text of proposed laws
(2) Funds received under this subdivision shall be deposited as follows
in order to avoid the commingling of those funds with other local funds:
(A) In the case of a city, into the city account that is designated for
the receipt of state funds allocated for local streets and roads.
(B) In the case of an eligible county, into the county road fund.
(C) In the case of a city and county, into a local account that is
designated for the receipt of state funds allocated for local streets and
roads.
(3) For the purpose of allocating funds under this subdivision
to cities and a city and county, the Controller shall use the most recent
population estimates prepared by the Demographic Research Unit of the
Department of Finance. For a city that incorporated after January 1, 1998,
that does not appear on the most recent population estimates prepared by
the Demographic Research Unit, the Controller shall use the population
determined for that city under Section 11005.3 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code.
(4) Funds apportioned to a city, county, or city and county under this
subdivision shall be used for improvements to transportation facilities that
will assist in reducing local traffic congestion and further deterioration,
improving traffic flows, or increasing traffic safety that may include, but
not be limited to, street and highway pavement maintenance, rehabilitation,
installation, construction and reconstruction of necessary associated
facilities such as drainage and traffic control devices, or the maintenance,
rehabilitation, installation, construction and reconstruction of facilities
that expand ridership on transit systems, safety projects to reduce
fatalities, or as a local match to obtain state or federal transportation
funds for similar purposes.
(5) At the conclusion of each fiscal year during which a city or county
expends the funds it has received under this subdivision, the Controller
may verify the city’s or county’s compliance with paragraph (4). Any city
or county that has not complied with paragraph (4) shall reimburse the
state for the funds it received during that fiscal year. Any funds withheld
or returned as a result of a failure to comply with paragraph (4) shall
be reallocated to the other counties and cities whose expenditures are in
compliance.
Article 3. Fiscal Provisions
8879.25. Bonds in the total amount of nineteen billion nine hundred
twenty-five million dollars ($19,925,000,000), exclusive of refunding
bonds, or so much thereof as is necessary, are hereby authorized to be
issued and sold for carrying out the purposes expressed in this chapter
and to reimburse the General Obligation Bond Expense Revolving Fund
pursuant to Section 16724.5. All bonds herein authorized which have
been duly sold and delivered as provided herein shall constitute valid and
legally binding general obligations of the state, and the full faith and credit
of the state is hereby pledged for the punctual payment of both principal
and interest thereof.
8879.26. The bonds authorized by this chapter shall be prepared,
executed, issued, sold, paid, and redeemed as provided in the State General
Obligation Bond Law (Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 16720) of Part
3 of Division 4), except subdivision (a) of Section 16727 to the extent that
subdivision is inconsistent with this chapter, and all of the other provisions
of that law as amended from time to time apply to the bonds and to this
chapter and are hereby incorporated in this chapter as though set forth in
full in this chapter.
8879.27. (a) Solely for the purpose of authorizing the issuance and
sale, pursuant to the State General Obligation Bond Law, of the bonds
authorized by this chapter, the Highway Safety, Traffic Reduction, Air
Quality, and Port Security Committee is hereby created. For the purposes
of this chapter, the Highway Safety, Traffic Reduction, Air Quality, and
Port Security Committee is “the committee” as that term is used in the State
General Obligation Bond Law. The committee consists of the Treasurer,
the Controller, the Director of Finance, and the Secretary of the Business,
Transportation and Housing Agency, or a designated representative of
each of those officials. The Treasurer shall serve as the chairperson of the
committee. A majority of the committee may act for the committee.
(b) The committee may adopt guidelines establishing requirements
for administration of its financing programs to the extent necessary to
protect the validity of, and tax exemption for, interest on the bonds. The
guidelines shall not constitute rules, regulations, orders, or standards of
general application.

Text of Proposed Laws | 117

1B

text of proposed laws

1B

1C

(c) For the purposes of the State General Obligation Bond Law, any
department receiving an allocation pursuant to this chapter is designated
to be the “board.”
8879.28. Upon request of the board stating that funds are needed
for purposes of this chapter, the committee shall determine whether or
not it is necessary or desirable to issue bonds authorized pursuant to this
chapter in order to carry out the actions specified in Section 8879.23, and,
if so, the amount of bonds to be issued and sold. Successive issues of bonds
may be authorized and sold to carry out those actions progressively, and
are not required to be sold at any one time. Bonds may bear interest subject
to federal income tax.
8879.29. There shall be collected annually, in the same manner and
at the same time as other state revenue is collected, a sum of money in
addition to the ordinary revenues of the state, sufficient to pay the principal
of, and interest on, the bonds as provided herein, and all officers required
by law to perform any duty in regard to the collections of state revenues
shall collect that additional sum.
8879.30. Notwithstanding Section 13340, there is hereby
appropriated from the General Fund in the State Treasury, for the purposes
of this chapter, an amount that will equal the total of the following:
(a) The sum annually necessary to pay the principal of, and interest
on, bonds issued and sold pursuant to this chapter, as the principal and
interest become due and payable.
(b) The sum which is necessary to carry out Section 8879.32,
appropriated without regard to fiscal years.
8879.31. The board may request the Pooled Money Investment
Board to make a loan from the Pooled Money Investment Account, in
accordance with Section 16312, for purposes of this chapter. The amount
of the request shall not exceed the amount of the unsold bonds which
the committee has, by resolution, authorized to be sold for the purpose
of this chapter, less any amount withdrawn pursuant to Section 8879.32.
The board shall execute any documents as required by the Pooled Money
Investment Board to obtain and repay the loan. Any amount loaned shall
be deposited in the fund to be allocated in accordance with this chapter.
8879.32. For the purpose of carrying out this chapter, the Director of
Finance may, by executive order, authorize the withdrawal from the General
Fund of any amount or amounts not to exceed the amount of the unsold bonds
which the committee has, by resolution, authorized to be sold for the purpose
of carrying out this chapter. Any amounts withdrawn shall be deposited in
the Highway Safety, Traffic Reduction, Air Quality, and Port Security Fund
of 2006. Any money made available under this section shall be returned to
the General Fund, plus the interest that the amounts would have earned in
the Pooled Money Investment Account, from money received from the sale of
bonds which would otherwise be deposited in that fund.
8879.33. The bonds may be refunded in accordance with Article 6
(commencing with Section 16780) of the State General Obligation Bond Law.
Approval by the electors of this act shall constitute approval of any refunding
bonds issued pursuant to the State General Obligation Bond Law.
8879.34. Notwithstanding any provisions in the State General
Obligation Bond Law, the maximum maturity of any bonds authorized by
this chapter shall not exceed 30 years from the date of each respective series.
The maturity of each series shall be calculated from the date of each series.
8879.35. The Legislature hereby finds and declares that, inasmuch
as the proceeds from the sale of bonds authorized by this chapter are not
“proceeds of taxes” as that term is used in Article XIII B of the California
Constitution, the disbursement of these proceeds is not subject to the
limitations imposed by that article.
8879.36. Notwithstanding any provision of the State General
Obligation Bond Law with regard to the proceeds from the sale of bonds
authorized by this chapter that are subject to investment under Article 4
(commencing with Section 16470) of Chapter 3 of Part 2 of Division 4,
the Treasurer may maintain a separate account for investment earnings,
order the payment of those earnings to comply with any rebate requirement
applicable under federal law, and may otherwise direct the use and
investment of those proceeds so as to maintain the tax-exempt status of
those bonds and to obtain any other advantage under federal law on behalf
of the funds of this state.
8879.37. All money derived from premium and accrued interest on
bonds sold pursuant to this chapter shall be transferred to the General
Fund as a credit to expenditures for bond interest.

118 | Text of Proposed Laws

PROPOSITION 1C
This law proposed by Senate Bill 1689 of the 2005–2006 Regular
Session (Chapter 27, Statutes of 2006) is submitted to the people
in accordance with the provisions of Article XVI of the California
Constitution.
This proposed law adds sections to the Health and Safety Code;
therefore, new provisions proposed to be added are printed in italic type to
indicate that they are new.
PROPOSED LAW
SEC. 2. Part 12 (commencing with Section 53540) is added to
Division 31 of the Health and Safety Code, to read:
PART 12. HOUSING AND EMERGENCY SHELTER
TRUST FUND ACT OF 2006

CHAPTER 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
53540. (a) This part shall be known as the Housing and Emergency
Shelter Trust Fund Act of 2006.
(b) This part shall only become operative upon adoption by the
voters at the November 7, 2006, statewide general election.
53541. As used in this part, the following terms have the following
meanings:
(a) “Board” means the Department of Housing and Community
Development for programs administered by the department, and the
California Housing Finance Agency for programs administered by the
agency.
(b) “Committee” means the Housing Finance Committee created
pursuant to Section 53524 and continued in existence pursuant to Section
53548.
(c) “Fund” means the Housing and Emergency Shelter Trust Fund
created pursuant to Section 53545.

CHAPTER 2. HOUSING AND EMERGENCY SHELTER
TRUST FUND OF 2006 AND PROGRAM
53545. The Housing and Emergency Shelter Trust Fund of 2006
is hereby created in the State Treasury. The Legislature intends that the
proceeds of bonds deposited in the fund shall be used to fund the housingrelated programs described in this chapter over the course of the next
decade. The proceeds of bonds issued and sold pursuant to this part for
the purposes specified in this chapter shall be allocated in the following
manner:
(a) (1) One billion five hundred million dollars ($1,500,000,000) to
be deposited in the Affordable Housing Account, which is hereby created
in the fund. Notwithstanding Section 13340 of the Government Code, the
money in the account shall be continuously appropriated in accordance
with the following schedule:
(A) (i) Three hundred forty-five million dollars ($345,000,000) shall
be transferred to the Housing Rehabilitation Loan Fund to be expended for
the Multifamily Housing Program authorized by Chapter 6.7 (commencing
with Section 50675) of Part 2. The priorities specified in Section 50675.13
shall apply to the expenditure of funds pursuant to this clause.
(ii) Fifty million dollars ($50,000,000) shall be transferred to the
Housing Rehabilitation Loan Fund to be expended under the Multifamily
Housing Program authorized by Chapter 6.7 (commencing with Section
50675) of Part 2 for housing meeting the definitions in paragraphs (2)
and (3) of subdivision (e) of Section 11139.3 of the Government Code.
The department may provide higher per-unit loan limits as necessary to
achieve affordable housing costs to the target population. Any funds not
encumbered for the purposes of this clause within 30 months of availability
shall revert for general use in the Multifamily Housing Program.
(B) One hundred ninety-five million dollars ($195,000,000) shall
be transferred to the Housing Rehabilitation Loan Fund to be expended
for the Multifamily Housing Program authorized by Chapter 6.7

(PROPOSITION 1C CONTINUED)

(commencing with Section 50675) of Part 2, to be used for supportive
housing for individuals and households moving from emergency shelters
or transitional housing or those at risk of homelessness. The Department
of Housing and Community Development shall provide for higher per-unit
loan limits as reasonably necessary to achieve housing costs affordable
to those individuals and households. For purposes of this subparagraph,
“supportive housing” means housing with no limit on length of stay, that is
occupied by the target population, as defined in subdivision (d) of Section
53260, and that is linked to onsite or offsite services that assist the tenant
to retain the housing, improve his or her health status, maximize his or her
ability to live, and, when possible, work in the community. The criteria for
selecting projects shall give priority to:
(i) Supportive housing for people with disabilities who would
otherwise be at high risk of homelessness where the applications
represent collaboration with programs that meet the needs of the person’s
disabilities.
(ii) Projects that demonstrate funding commitments from local
governments for operating subsidies or services funding, or both, for five
years or longer.
(C) One hundred thirty-five million dollars ($135,000,000) shall be
transferred to the fund created by subdivision (b) of Section 50517.5 to be
expended for the programs authorized by Chapter 3.2 (commencing with
Section 50517.5) of Part 2.
(D) Three hundred million dollars ($300,000,000) shall be
transferred to the Self-Help Housing Fund created by Section 50697.1.
These funds shall be available to the Department of Housing and
Community Development, to be expended for the purposes of enabling
households to become or remain homeowners pursuant to the CalHome
Program authorized by Chapter 6 (commencing with Section 50650)
of Part 2, except ten million dollars ($10,000,000) shall be expended
for construction management under the California Self-Help Housing
Program pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 50696.
(E) Two hundred million dollars ($200,000,000) shall be transferred
to the Self-Help Housing Fund created by Section 50697.1. These funds shall
be available to the California Housing Finance Agency, to be expended
for the purposes of the California Homebuyer’s Downpayment Assistance
Program authorized by Chapter 11 (commencing with Section 51500) of
Part 3. Up to one hundred million dollars ($100,000,000) of these funds
may be expended pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 51504.
(F) One hundred million dollars ($100,000,000) shall be transferred
to the Affordable Housing Innovation Fund, which is hereby created in
the State Treasury, to be administered by the Department of Housing
and Community Development. Funds shall be expended for competitive
grants or loans to sponsoring entities that develop, own, lend, or invest
in affordable housing and used to create pilot programs to demonstrate
innovative, cost-saving approaches to creating or preserving affordable
housing. Specific criteria establishing eligibility for and use of the funds
shall be established in statute as approved by a 2/3 vote of each house of
the Legislature. Any funds not encumbered for the purposes set forth in this
subparagraph within 30 months of availability shall revert to the Self-Help
Housing Fund created by Section 50697.1 and shall be available for the
purposes described in subparagraph (D).
(G) One hundred twenty-five million dollars ($125,000,000) shall
be transferred to the Building Equity and Growth in Neighborhoods
Fund to be used for the Building Equity and Growth in Neighborhoods
(BEGIN) Program pursuant to Chapter 14.5 (commencing with Section
50860) of Part 1. Any funds not encumbered for the purposes set forth in
this subparagraph within 30 months of availability shall revert for general
use in the CalHome Program.
(H) Fifty million dollars ($50,000,000) shall be transferred to the
Emergency Housing and Assistance Fund to be distributed in the form of
capital development grants under the Emergency Housing and Assistance
Program authorized by Chapter 11.5 (commencing with Section 50800) of
Part 2 of Division 31. The funds shall be administered by the Department
of Housing and Community Development in a manner consistent with the
restrictions and authorizations contained in Provision 3 of Item 2240-1050001 of the Budget Act of 2000, except that any appropriations in that
item shall not apply. The competitive system used by the department shall
incorporate priorities set by the designated local boards and their input as
to the relative merits of submitted applications from within the designated
local board’s county in relation to those priorities. In addition, the funding

text of proposed laws
limitations contained in this section shall not apply to the appropriation
in that budget item.
(2) The Legislature may, from time to time, amend the provisions
of law related to programs to which funds are, or have been, allocated
pursuant to this subdivision for the purpose of improving the efficiency
and effectiveness of the program, or for the purpose of furthering the goals
of the program.
(3) The Bureau of State Audits shall conduct periodic audits to
ensure that bond proceeds are awarded in a timely fashion and in a manner
consistent with the requirements of this subdivision, and that awardees of
bond proceeds are using funds in compliance with applicable provisions of
this subdivision. The first audit shall be conducted no later than one year
from voter approval of this part.
(4) In its annual report to the Legislature, the Department of
Housing and Community Development shall report how funds that were
made available pursuant to this subdivision and allocated in the prior year
were expended. The department shall make the report available to the
public on its Internet Web site.
(b) Eight hundred fi fty million dollars ($850,000,000) shall
be deposited in the Regional Planning, Housing, and Infill Incentive
Account, which is hereby created in the fund. Funds in the account shall
be available, upon appropriation by the Legislature, and subject to such
other conditions and criteria as the Legislature may provide in statute, for
the following purposes:
(1) For infill incentive grants for capital outlay related to infill
housing development and other related infill development, including, but
not limited to, all of the following:
(A) No more than two hundred million dollars ($200,000,000)
for park creation, development, or rehabilitation to encourage infill
development.
(B) Water, sewer, or other public infrastructure costs associated
with infill development.
(C) Transportation improvements related to infill development
projects.
(D) Traffic mitigation.
(2) For brownfield cleanup that promotes infill housing development
and other related infill development consistent with regional and local
plans.
(c) Three hundred million dollars ($300,000,000) to be deposited
in the Transit-Oriented Development Account, which is hereby created in
the fund, for transfer to the Transit-Oriented Development Implementation
Fund, for expenditure, upon appropriation by the Legislature, pursuant to
the Transit-Oriented Development Implementation Program authorized by
Part 13 (commencing with Section 50560).
(d) Two hundred million dollars ($200,000,000) shall be deposited
in the Housing Urban-Suburban-and-Rural Parks Account, which is
hereby created in the fund. Funds in the account shall be available upon
appropriation by the Legislature for housing-related parks grants in
urban, suburban, and rural areas, subject to the conditions and criteria
that the Legislature may provide in statute.

CHAPTER 3. FISCAL PROVISIONS
53546. Bonds in the total amount of two billion eight hundred fi fty
million dollars ($2,850,000,000), exclusive of refunding bonds, or so much
thereof as is necessary, are hereby authorized to be issued and sold for
carrying out the purposes expressed in this part and to reimburse the
General Obligation Bond Expense Revolving Fund pursuant to Section
16724.5 of the Government Code. All bonds herein authorized which have
been duly sold and delivered as provided herein shall constitute valid and
legally binding general obligations of the state, and the full faith and credit
of the state is hereby pledged for the punctual payment of both principal
and interest thereof.
53547. The bonds authorized by this part shall be prepared,
executed, issued, sold, paid, and redeemed as provided in the State General
Obligation Bond Law (Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 16720) of Part
3 of Division 4), except subdivision (a) of Section 16727 to the extent that
it is inconsistent with this part, and all of the other provisions of that law
as amended from time to time apply to the bonds and to this part and are
hereby incorporated in this part as though set forth in full in this part.
53548. (a) Solely for the purpose of authorizing the issuance and

Text of Proposed Laws | 119

1C

text of proposed laws

1C
1D

sale, pursuant to the State General Obligation Bond Law, of the bonds
authorized by this part, the Housing Finance Committee created pursuant
to Section 53524 is continued in existence. For the purposes of this part,
the Housing Finance Committee is “the committee” as that term is used in
the State General Obligation Bond Law.
(b) The committee may adopt guidelines establishing requirements
for administration of its financing programs to the extent necessary to
protect the validity of, and tax exemption for, interest on the bonds. The
guidelines shall not constitute rules, regulations, orders, or standards of
general application and are not subject to Chapter 3.5 (commencing with
Section 11340) of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code.
(c) For the purposes of the State General Obligation Bond Law, the
Department of Housing and Community Development is designated the
“board” for programs administered by the department, and the California
Housing Finance Agency is the “board” for programs administered by
the agency.
53549. Upon request of the board stating that funds are needed for
purposes of this part, the committee shall determine whether or not it is
necessary or desirable to issue bonds authorized pursuant to this part in
order to carry out the actions specified in Section 53545, and, if so, the
amount of bonds to be issued and sold. Successive issues of bonds may be
authorized and sold to carry out those actions progressively, and are not
required to be sold at any one time. Bonds may bear interest subject to
federal income tax.
53550. There shall be collected annually, in the same manner and
at the same time as other state revenue is collected, a sum of money in
addition to the ordinary revenues of the state, sufficient to pay the principal
of, and interest on, the bonds as provided herein, and all officers required
by law to perform any duty in regard to the collections of state revenues
shall collect that additional sum.
53551. Notwithstanding Section 13340 of the Government Code,
there is hereby appropriated from the General Fund in the State Treasury,
for the purposes of this part, an amount that will equal the total of the
following:
(a) The sum annually necessary to pay the principal of, and interest
on, bonds issued and sold pursuant to this part, as the principal and
interest become due and payable.
(b) The sum which is necessary to carry out Section 53553,
appropriated without regard to fiscal years.
53552. The board may request the Pooled Money Investment Board
to make a loan from the Pooled Money Investment Account, in accordance
with Section 16312 of the Government Code, for purposes of this part. The
amount of the request shall not exceed the amount of the unsold bonds which
the committee has, by resolution, authorized to be sold for the purpose of
this part, less any amount withdrawn pursuant to Section 53553. The board
shall execute any documents as required by the Pooled Money Investment
Board to obtain and repay the loan. Any amount loaned shall be deposited
in the fund to be allocated in accordance with this part.
53553. For the purpose of carrying out this part, the Director
of Finance may, by executive order, authorize the withdrawal from the
General Fund of any amount or amounts not to exceed the amount of the
unsold bonds which the committee has, by resolution, authorized to be sold
for the purpose of carrying out this part. Any amounts withdrawn shall be
deposited in the fund. Any money made available under this section shall be
returned to the General Fund, plus the interest that the amounts would have
earned in the Pooled Money Investment Account, from money received from
the sale of bonds which would otherwise be deposited in that fund.
53554. The bonds may be refunded in accordance with Article 6
(commencing with Section 16780) of the State General Obligation Bond Law.
Approval by the electors of this act shall constitute approval of any refunding
bonds issued pursuant to the State General Obligation Bond Law.
53555. Notwithstanding any provisions in the State General
Obligation Bond Law, the maximum maturity of any bonds authorized
by this part shall not exceed 30 years from the date of each respective
series. The maturity of each series shall be calculated from the date of
each series.
53556. The Legislature hereby finds and declares that, inasmuch
as the proceeds from the sale of bonds authorized by this part are not
“proceeds of taxes” as that term is used in Article XIII B of the California
Constitution, the disbursement of these proceeds is not subject to the
limitations imposed by that article.

120 | Text of Proposed Laws

53557. Notwithstanding any provision of the State General
Obligation Bond Law with regard to the proceeds from the sale of bonds
authorized by this part that are subject to investment under Article 4
(commencing with Section 16470) of Chapter 3 of Part 2 of Division 4 of
Title 2 of the Government Code, the Treasurer may maintain a separate
account for investment earnings, order the payment of those earnings to
comply with any rebate requirement applicable under federal law, and may
otherwise direct the use and investment of those proceeds so as to maintain
the tax-exempt status of those bonds and to obtain any other advantage
under federal law on behalf of the funds of this state.
53558. All money derived from premium and accrued interest on
bonds sold pursuant to this chapter shall be transferred to the General
Fund as a credit to expenditures for bond interest.

PROPOSITION 1D
This law proposed by Assembly Bill 127 of the 2005 –2006 Regular
Session (Chapter 35, Statutes of 2006) is submitted to the people
in accordance with the provisions of Article XVI of the California
Constitution.
This proposed law adds sections to the Education Code; therefore,
new provisions proposed to be added are printed in italic type to indicate
that they are new.
PROPOSED LAW
SEC. 16. Part 69 (commencing with Section 101000) is added to the
Education Code, to read:
PART 69. KINDERGARTEN–UNIVERSITY PUBLIC EDUCATION
FACILITIES BOND ACT OF 2006

CHAPTER 1. GENERAL
101000. This part shall be known and may be cited as the
Kindergarten–University Public Education Facilities Bond Act of 2006.
101001. The incorporation of, or reference to, any provision of
California statutory law in this part includes all acts amendatory thereof
and supplementary thereto.
101002. (a) Bonds in the total amount of ten billion four hundred
sixteen million dollars ($10,416,000,000), not including the amount of any
refunding bonds issued in accordance with Sections 101030, 101039, and
101059, or so much thereof as is necessary, may be issued and sold to
provide a fund to be used for carrying out the purposes expressed in this
part and to reimburse the General Obligation Bond Expense Revolving
Fund pursuant to Section 16724.5 of the Government Code. The bonds,
when sold, shall be and constitute a valid and binding obligation of the
State of California, and the full faith and credit of the State of California is
hereby pledged for the punctual payment of the principal of, and interest
on, the bonds as the principal and interest become due and payable.
(b) Pursuant to this section, the Treasurer shall sell the bonds
authorized by the State School Building Finance Committee established
by Section 15909 or the Higher Education Facilities Finance Committee
established pursuant to Section 67353, as the case may be, at any different
times necessary to service expenditures required by the apportionments.

CHAPTER 2. KINDERGARTEN THROUGH 12TH GRADE
Article 1. Kindergarten Through 12th Grade School
Facilities Program Provisions
101010. The proceeds of bonds issued and sold pursuant to Article
2 (commencing with Section 101020) shall be deposited in the 2006 State
School Facilities Fund established in the State Treasury under subdivision
(d) of Section 17070.40 and shall be allocated by the State Allocation
Board pursuant to this chapter.
101011. All moneys deposited in the 2006 State School Facilities
Fund for the purposes of this chapter shall be available to provide aid
to school districts, county superintendents of schools, and county boards
of education of the state in accordance with the Leroy F. Greene School
Facilities Act of 1998 (Chapter 12.5 (commencing with Section 17070.10)
of Part 10), as set forth in Section 101012, to provide funds to repay any
money advanced or loaned to the 2006 State School Facilities Fund under

(PROPOSITION 1D CONTINUED)

any act of the Legislature, together with interest provided for in that act,
and to reimburse the General Obligation Bond Expense Revolving Fund
pursuant to Section 16724.5 of the Government Code.
101012. (a) The proceeds from the sale of bonds, issued and sold
for the purposes of this chapter, shall be allocated in accordance with the
following schedule:
(1) The amount of one billion nine hundred million dollars
($1,900,000,000) for new construction of school facilities of applicant
school districts under Chapter 12.5 (commencing with Section 17070.10)
of Part 10. Of the amount allocated under this paragraph, up to 10.5
percent shall be available for purposes of seismic repair, reconstruction,
or replacement, pursuant to Section 17075.10.
(2) The amount of five hundred million dollars ($500,000,000) shall
be available for providing school facilities to charter schools pursuant
to Article 12 (commencing with Section 17078.52) of Chapter 12.5 of
Part 10.
(3) The amount of three billion three hundred million dollars
($3,300,000,000) for the modernization of school facilities pursuant to
Chapter 12.5 (commencing with Section 17070.10) of Part 10.
(4) The amount of five hundred million dollars ($500,000,000) for
the purposes set forth in Article 13 (commencing with Section 17078.70) of
Chapter 12.5 of Part 10, relating to facilities for career technical education
programs.
(5) Of the amounts allocated under paragraphs (1) and (3), up to
two hundred million dollars ($200,000,000) for the purposes set forth in
Chapter 894 of the Statutes of 2004, relating to incentives for the creation
of smaller learning communities and small high schools.
(6) The amount of twenty-nine million dollars ($29,000,000) for the
purposes set forth in Article 10.6 (commencing with Section 17077.40) of
Chapter 12.5 of Part 10, relating to joint use projects.
(7) The amount of one billion dollars ($1,000,000,000) shall be
available for providing new construction funding to severely overcrowded
schoolsites pursuant to Article 14 (commencing with Section 17079) of
Chapter 12.5 of Part 10.
(8) The amount of one hundred million dollars ($100,000,000)
for incentive grants to promote the use of designs and materials in new
construction and modernization projects that include the attributes of
high-performance schools, including, but not limited to, the elements set
forth in Section 17070.96, pursuant to regulations adopted by the State
Allocation Board.
(b) School districts may use funds allocated pursuant to paragraph
(3) of subdivision (a) only for one or more of the following purposes in
accordance with Chapter 12.5 (commencing with Section 17070.10) of
Part 10:
(1) The purchase and installation of air-conditioning equipment and
insulation materials, and related costs.
(2) Construction projects or the purchase of furniture or equipment
designed to increase school security or playground safety.
(3) The identification, assessment, or abatement in school facilities
of hazardous asbestos.
(4) Project funding for high-priority roof replacement projects.
(5) Any other modernization of facilities pursuant to Chapter 12.5
(commencing with Section 17070.10) of Part 10.
(c) Funds allocated pursuant to paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) may
also be utilized to provide new construction grants for eligible applicant
county boards of education under Chapter 12.5 (commencing with Section
17070.10) of Part 10 for funding classrooms for severely handicapped
pupils, or for funding classrooms for county community school pupils.
(d) (1) The Legislature may amend this section to adjust the funding
amounts specified in paragraphs (1) to (8), inclusive, of subdivision (a),
only by either of the following methods:
(A) By a statute, passed in each house of the Legislature by rollcall
vote entered in the respective journals, by not less than two-thirds of the
membership in each house concurring, if the statute is consistent with, and
furthers the purposes of, this chapter.
(B) By a statute that becomes effective only when approved by the
voters.
(2) Amendments pursuant to this subdivision may adjust the amounts

text of proposed laws
to be expended pursuant to paragraphs (1) to (8), inclusive, of subdivision
(a), but may not increase or decrease the total amount to be expended
pursuant to that subdivision.
(e) Funds available pursuant to this section may be used for
acquisition of school facilities authorized pursuant to Section 17280.5.
Article 2. Kindergarten Through 12th Grade School
Facilities Fiscal Provisions
101020. (a) Of the total amount of bonds authorized to be issued
and sold pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 101000), bonds
in the amount of seven billion three hundred twenty-nine million dollars
($7,329,000,000) not including the amount of any refunding bonds issued
in accordance with Section 101030, or so much thereof as is necessary,
may be issued and sold to provide a fund to be used for carrying out
the purposes expressed in this chapter and to reimburse the General
Obligation Bond Expense Revolving Fund pursuant to Section 16724.5 of
the Government Code. The bonds, when sold, shall be and constitute a
valid and binding obligation of the State of California, and the full faith
and credit of the State of California is hereby pledged for the punctual
payment of the principal of, and interest on, the bonds as the principal and
interest become due and payable.
(b) Pursuant to this section, the Treasurer shall sell the bonds
authorized by the State School Building Finance Committee established
pursuant to Section 15909 at any different times necessary to service
expenditures required by the apportionments.
101021. The State School Building Finance Committee, established
by Section 15909 and composed of the Governor, the Controller, the
Treasurer, the Director of Finance, and the Superintendent, or their
designated representatives, all of whom shall serve thereon without
compensation, and a majority of whom shall constitute a quorum, is
continued in existence for the purpose of this chapter. The Treasurer
shall serve as chairperson of the committee. Two Members of the
Senate appointed by the Senate Committee on Rules, and two Members
of the Assembly appointed by the Speaker of the Assembly, shall meet
with and provide advice to the committee to the extent that the advisory
participation is not incompatible with their respective positions as
Members of the Legislature. For the purposes of this chapter, the Members
of the Legislature shall constitute an interim investigating committee on
the subject of this chapter and, as that committee, shall have the powers
granted to, and duties imposed upon, those committees by the Joint Rules
of the Senate and the Assembly. The Director of Finance shall provide
assistance to the committee as it may require. The Attorney General of the
state is the legal adviser of the committee.
101022. (a) The bonds authorized by this chapter shall be
prepared, executed, issued, sold, paid, and redeemed as provided in the
State General Obligation Bond Law (Chapter 4 (commencing with Section
16720) of Part 3 of Division 4 of Title 2 of the Government Code), and all
of the provisions of that law, except Section 16727 of the Government Code
to the extent that it conflicts with this part, apply to the bonds and to this
chapter and are hereby incorporated into this chapter as though set forth in
full within this chapter.
(b) For purposes of the State General Obligation Bond Law, the State
Allocation Board is designated the “board” for purposes of administering
the 2006 State School Facilities Fund.
101023. (a) Upon request of the State Allocation Board, the State
School Building Finance Committee shall determine whether or not it is
necessary or desirable to issue bonds authorized pursuant to this chapter
in order to fund the apportionments and, if so, the amount of bonds to be
issued and sold. Successive issues of bonds may be authorized and sold to
fund those apportionments progressively, and it is not necessary that all of
the bonds authorized to be issued be sold at any one time.
(b) A request of the State Allocation Board pursuant to subdivision
(a) shall be supported by a statement of the apportionments made and to be
made for the purposes described in Sections 101011 and 101012.
101024. There shall be collected each year and in the same manner
and at the same time as other state revenue is collected, in addition to
the ordinary revenues of the state, a sum in an amount required to pay
the principal of, and interest on, the bonds each year. It is the duty of all
officers charged by law with any duty in regard to the collection of the
revenue to do and perform each and every act that is necessary to collect

Text of Proposed Laws | 121

1D

text of proposed laws

1D

that additional sum.
101025. Notwithstanding Section 13340 of the Government Code,
there is hereby appropriated from the General Fund in the State Treasury,
for the purposes of this chapter, an amount that will equal the total of the
following:
(a) The sum annually necessary to pay the principal of, and interest
on, bonds issued and sold pursuant to this chapter, as the principal and
interest become due and payable.
(b) The sum necessary to carry out Section 101028, appropriated
without regard to fiscal years.
101026. The State Allocation Board may request the Pooled Money
Investment Board to make a loan from the Pooled Money Investment
Account or any other approved form of interim financing, in accordance
with Section 16312 of the Government Code, for the purpose of carrying
out this chapter. The amount of the request shall not exceed the amount of
the unsold bonds that the committee, by resolution, has authorized to be
sold for the purpose of carrying out this chapter. The board shall execute
any documents required by the Pooled Money Investment Board to obtain
and repay the loan. Any amounts loaned shall be deposited in the fund to
be allocated by the board in accordance with this chapter.
101027. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, or
of the State General Obligation Bond Law, if the Treasurer sells bonds
pursuant to this chapter that include a bond counsel opinion to the effect
that the interest on the bonds is excluded from gross income for federal
tax purposes, subject to designated conditions, the Treasurer may maintain
separate accounts for the investment of bond proceeds and for the
investment earnings on those proceeds. The Treasurer may use or direct
the use of those proceeds or earnings to pay any rebate, penalty, or other
payment required under federal law or take any other action with respect to
the investment and use of those bond proceeds required or desirable under
federal law to maintain the tax-exempt status of those bonds and to obtain
any other advantage under federal law on behalf of the funds of this state.
101028. For the purposes of carrying out this chapter, the Director
of Finance may authorize the withdrawal from the General Fund of an
amount not to exceed the amount of the unsold bonds that have been
authorized by the State School Building Finance Committee to be sold
for the purpose of carrying out this chapter. Any amounts withdrawn
shall be deposited in the 2006 State School Facilities Fund consistent
with this chapter. Any money made available under this section shall be
returned to the General Fund, plus an amount equal to the interest that
the money would have earned in the Pooled Money Investment Account,
from proceeds received from the sale of bonds for the purpose of carrying
out this chapter.
101029. All money deposited in the 2006 State School Facilities
Fund, that is derived from premium and accrued interest on bonds sold
shall be reserved in the fund and shall be available for transfer to the
General Fund as a credit to expenditures for bond interest.
101030. The bonds may be refunded in accordance with Article 6
(commencing with Section 16780) of Chapter 4 of Part 3 of Division 4
of Title 2 of the Government Code, which is a part of the State General
Obligation Bond Law. Approval by the voters of the state for the issuance
of the bonds described in this chapter includes the approval of the issuance
of any bonds issued to refund any bonds originally issued under this
chapter or any previously issued refunding bonds.
101031. The Legislature hereby finds and declares that, inasmuch
as the proceeds from the sale of bonds authorized by this chapter are not
“proceeds of taxes” as that term is used in Article XIII B of the California
Constitution, the disbursement of these proceeds is not subject to the
limitations imposed by that article.

CHAPTER 3. CALIFORNIA COMMUNITY COLLEGE FACILITIES
Article 1.

General

101032. (a) The 2006 California Community College Capital
Outlay Bond Fund is hereby established in the State Treasury for deposit
of funds from the proceeds of bonds issued and sold for the purposes of
this chapter.
(b) The Higher Education Facilities Finance Committee established
pursuant to Section 67353 is hereby authorized to create a debt or debts,

122 | Text of Proposed Laws

liability or liabilities, of the State of California pursuant to this chapter for
the purpose of providing funds to aid the California Community Colleges.
Article 2.

California Community College Program Provisions

101033. (a) From the proceeds of bonds issued and sold pursuant
to Article 3 (commencing with Section 101034), the sum of one billion five
hundred seven million dollars ($1,507,000,000) shall be deposited in the
2006 California Community College Capital Outlay Bond Fund for the
purposes of this article. When appropriated, these funds shall be available
for expenditure for the purposes of this article.
(b) The purposes of this article include assisting in meeting the
capital outlay financing needs of the California Community Colleges.
(c) Proceeds from the sale of bonds issued and sold for the purposes
of this article may be used to fund construction on existing campuses,
including the construction of buildings and the acquisition of related
fi xtures, construction of facilities that may be used by more than one
segment of public higher education (intersegmental), the renovation
and reconstruction of facilities, site acquisition, the equipping of new,
renovated, or reconstructed facilities, which equipment shall have an
average useful life of 10 years; and to provide funds for the payment of
preconstruction costs, including, but not limited to, preliminary plans and
working drawings for facilities of the California Community Colleges.
Article 3.

California Community College Fiscal Provisions

101034. (a) Of the total amount of bonds authorized to be issued
and sold pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 101000),
bonds in the total amount of one billion five hundred seven million dollars
($1,507,000,000), not including the amount of any refunding bonds issued
in accordance with Section 101039, or so much thereof as is necessary,
may be issued and sold to provide a fund to be used for carrying out
the purposes expressed in this chapter and to reimburse the General
Obligation Bond Expense Revolving Fund pursuant to Section 16724.5 of
the Government Code. The bonds, when sold, shall be and constitute a
valid and binding obligation of the State of California, and the full faith
and credit of the State of California is hereby pledged for the punctual
payment of the principal of, and interest on, the bonds as the principal and
interest become due and payable.
(b) It is the intent of the Legislature that the California Community
Colleges annually consider, as part of their annual capital outlay planning
process, the inclusion of facilities that may be used by more than one
segment of public higher education (intersegmental), and, that on or
before May 15th of each year, those entities report their findings to the
budget committees of each house of the Legislature.
(c) Pursuant to this section, the Treasurer shall sell the bonds
authorized by the Higher Education Facilities Finance Committee
established pursuant to Section 67353 at any different times necessary to
service expenditures required by the apportionments.
101034.5. (a) The bonds authorized by this chapter shall be
prepared, executed, issued, sold, paid, and redeemed as provided in the
State General Obligation Bond Law (Chapter 4 (commencing with Section
16720) of Part 3 of Division 4 of Title 2 of the Government Code), and all
of the provisions of that law, except Section 16727 of the Government Code
to the extent that it conflicts with this part, apply to the bonds and to this
chapter and are hereby incorporated into this chapter as though set forth
in full within this chapter.
(b) For the purposes of the State General Obligation Bond Law,
each state agency administering an appropriation of the 2006 Community
College Capital Outlay Bond Fund is designated as the “board” for
projects funded pursuant to this chapter.
(c) The proceeds of the bonds issued and sold pursuant to this
chapter shall be available for the purpose of funding aid to the California
Community Colleges for the construction on existing or new campuses,
and their respective off-campus centers and joint use and intersegmental
facilities, as set forth in this chapter.
101035. The Higher Education Facilities Finance Committee
established pursuant to Section 67353 shall authorize the issuance of bonds
under this chapter only to the extent necessary to fund the apportionments
for the purposes described in this chapter that are expressly authorized

(PROPOSITION 1D CONTINUED)

by the Legislature in the annual Budget Act. Pursuant to that legislative
direction, the committee shall determine whether or not it is necessary or
desirable to issue bonds authorized pursuant to this chapter in order to
carry out the purposes described in this chapter and, if so, the amount of
bonds to be issued and sold. Successive issues of bonds may be authorized
and sold to carry out those actions progressively, and it is not necessary
that all of the bonds authorized to be issued be sold at any one time.
101035.5. There shall be collected each year and in the same
manner and at the same time as other state revenue is collected, in addition
to the ordinary revenues of the state, a sum in an amount required to pay
the principal of, and interest on, the bonds each year. It is the duty of all
officers charged by law with any duty in regard to the collection of the
revenue to do and perform each and every act which is necessary to collect
that additional sum.
101036. Notwithstanding Section 13340 of the Government Code,
there is hereby appropriated from the General Fund in the State Treasury,
for the purposes of this chapter, an amount that will equal the total of the
following:
(a) The sum annually necessary to pay the principal of, and interest
on, bonds issued and sold pursuant to this chapter, as the principal and
interest become due and payable.
(b) The sum necessary to carry out Section 101037.5, appropriated
without regard to fiscal years.
101036.5. The board, as defined in subdivision (b) of Section
101034.5, may request the Pooled Money Investment Board to make a loan
from the Pooled Money Investment Account or any other approved form
of interim financing, in accordance with Section 16312 of the Government
Code, for the purpose of carrying out this chapter. The amount of the
request shall not exceed the amount of the unsold bonds that the committee,
by resolution, has authorized to be sold for the purpose of carrying out this
chapter. The board, as defined in subdivision (b) of Section 101034.5, shall
execute any documents required by the Pooled Money Investment Board
to obtain and repay the loan. Any amounts loaned shall be deposited in the
fund to be allocated by the board in accordance with this chapter.
101037. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, or
of the State General Obligation Bond Law, if the Treasurer sells bonds
pursuant to this chapter that include a bond counsel opinion to the effect
that the interest on the bonds is excluded from gross income for federal
tax purposes, subject to designated conditions, the Treasurer may maintain
separate accounts for the investment of bond proceeds and for the
investment earnings on those proceeds. The Treasurer may use or direct
the use of those proceeds or earnings to pay any rebate, penalty, or other
payment required under federal law or take any other action with respect to
the investment and use of those bond proceeds required or desirable under
federal law to maintain the tax-exempt status of those bonds and to obtain
any other advantage under federal law on behalf of the funds of this state.
101037.5. (a) For the purposes of carrying out this chapter, the
Director of Finance may authorize the withdrawal from the General Fund
of an amount not to exceed the amount of the unsold bonds that have been
authorized by the Higher Education Facilities Finance Committee to be
sold for the purpose of carrying out this chapter. Any amounts withdrawn
shall be deposited in the 2006 California Community College Capital
Outlay Bond Fund consistent with this chapter. Any money made available
under this section shall be returned to the General Fund, plus an amount
equal to the interest that the money would have earned in the Pooled
Money Investment Account, from proceeds received from the sale of bonds
for the purpose of carrying out this chapter.
(b) Any request forwarded to the Legislature and the Department
of Finance for funds from this bond issue for expenditure for the purposes
described in this chapter by the California Community Colleges shall be
accompanied by the five-year capital outlay plan that reflects the needs
and priorities of the community college system and is prioritized on a
statewide basis. Requests shall include a schedule that prioritizes the
seismic retrofitting needed to significantly reduce, in the judgment of the
particular college, seismic hazards in buildings identified as high priority
by the college.
101038. All money deposited in the 2006 California Community
College Capital Outlay Bond Fund that is derived from premium and
accrued interest on bonds sold shall be reserved in the fund and shall be
available for transfer to the General Fund as a credit to expenditures for
bond interest.

text of proposed laws
101039. The bonds may be refunded in accordance with Article 6
(commencing with Section 16780) of Chapter 4 of Part 3 of Division 4
of Title 2 of the Government Code, which is a part of the State General
Obligation Bond Law. Approval by the voters of the state for the issuance
of the bonds described in this chapter includes the approval of the issuance
of any bonds issued to refund any bonds originally issued under this
chapter or any previously issued refunding bonds.
101039.5. The Legislature hereby finds and declares that, inasmuch
as the proceeds from the sale of bonds authorized by this chapter are not
“proceeds of taxes” as that term is used in Article XIII B of the California
Constitution, the disbursement of these proceeds is not subject to the
limitations imposed by that article.

CHAPTER 4.

UNIVERSITY FACILITIES
Article 1.

General

101040. (a) The system of public universities in this state includes
the University of California, the Hastings College of the Law, and the
California State University, and their respective off-campus centers.
(b) The 2006 University Capital Outlay Bond Fund is hereby
established in the State Treasury for deposit of funds from the proceeds of
bonds issued and sold for the purposes of this chapter.
(c) The Higher Education Facilities Finance Committee established
pursuant to Section 67353 is hereby authorized to create a debt or debts,
liability or liabilities, of the State of California pursuant to this chapter
for the purpose of providing funds to aid the University of California, the
Hastings College of the Law, and the California State University.
Article 2. Program Provisions Applicable to the University of
California and the Hastings College of the Law
101041. (a) From the proceeds of bonds issued and sold pursuant
to Article 4 (commencing with Section 101050), the sum of eight hundred
ninety million dollars ($890,000,000) shall be deposited in the 2006
University Capital Outlay Bond Fund for the purposes of this article.
When appropriated, these funds shall be available for expenditure for the
purposes of this article.
(b) The purposes of this article include assisting in meeting the
capital outlay financing needs of the University of California and the
Hastings College of the Law.
(c) Of the amount made available under subdivision (a), the amount
of two hundred million dollars ($200,000,000) shall be used for capital
improvements that expand and enhance medical education programs with
an emphasis on telemedicine aimed at developing high-tech approaches
to health care.
(d) Proceeds from the sale of bonds issued and sold for the purposes
of this article may be used to fund construction on existing campuses,
including the construction of buildings and the acquisition of related
fi xtures, construction of facilities that may be used by more than one
segment of public higher education (intersegmental), the renovation
and reconstruction of facilities, site acquisition, the equipping of new,
renovated, or reconstructed facilities, which equipment shall have an
average useful life of 10 years; and to provide funds for the payment of
preconstruction costs, including, but not limited to, preliminary plans
and working drawings for facilities of the University of California and the
Hastings College of the Law.
Article 3. Program Provisions Applicable
to the California State University
101042. (a) From the proceeds of bonds issued and sold pursuant
to Article 4 (commencing with Section 101050), the sum of six hundred
ninety million dollars ($690,000,000) shall be deposited in the 2006
University Capital Outlay Bond Fund for the purposes of this article.
When appropriated, these funds shall be available for expenditure for the
purposes of this article.
(b) The purposes of this article include assisting in meeting the
capital outlay financing needs of the California State University.
(c) Proceeds from the sale of bonds issued and sold for the purposes
of this article may be used to fund construction on existing campuses,
including the construction of buildings and the acquisition of related

Text of Proposed Laws | 123

1D

text of proposed laws
fi xtures, construction of facilities that may be used by more than one
segment of public higher education (intersegmental), the renovation
and reconstruction of facilities, site acquisition, the equipping of new,
renovated, or reconstructed facilities, which equipment shall have an
average useful life of 10 years; and to provide funds for the payment of
preconstruction costs, including, but not limited to, preliminary plans and
working drawings for facilities of the California State University.
Article 4.

1D

University Fiscal Provisions

101050. (a) Of the total amount of bonds authorized to be issued and
sold pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 101000), bonds in the
amount of one billion five hundred eighty million dollars ($1,580,000,000),
not including the amount of any refunding bonds issued in accordance with
Section 101059, or so much thereof as is necessary, may be issued and sold
to provide a fund to be used for carrying out the purposes expressed in this
chapter and to reimburse the General Obligation Bond Expense Revolving
Fund pursuant to Section 16724.5 of the Government Code. The bonds,
when sold, shall be and constitute a valid and binding obligation of the
State of California, and the full faith and credit of the State of California is
hereby pledged for the punctual payment of the principal of, and interest
on, the bonds as the principal and interest become due and payable.
(b) It is the intent of the Legislature that the University of California
and the California State University annually consider, as part of their annual
capital outlay planning process, the inclusion of facilities that may be used
by more than one segment of public higher education (intersegmental), and,
that on or before May 15 of each year, those entities report their findings to
the budget committees of each house of the Legislature.
(c) Pursuant to this section, the Treasurer shall sell the bonds
authorized by the Higher Education Facilities Finance Committee
established pursuant to Section 67353 at any different times necessary to
service expenditures required by the apportionments.
101051 (a) The bonds authorized by this chapter shall be prepared,
executed, issued, sold, paid, and redeemed as provided in the State General
Obligation Bond Law (Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 16720) of
Part 3 of Division 4 of Title 2 of the Government Code), and all of the
provisions of that law, except Section 16727 of the Government Code to the
extent that it conflicts with this part, apply to the bonds and to this chapter
and are hereby incorporated into this chapter as though set forth in full
within this chapter.
(b) For the purposes of the State General Obligation Bond Law,
each state agency administering an appropriation of the 2006 University
Capital Outlay Bond Fund is designated as the “board” for projects
funded pursuant to this chapter.
(c) The proceeds of the bonds issued and sold pursuant to this
chapter shall be available for the purpose of funding aid to the University
of California, the Hastings College of the Law, and the California State
University, for the construction on existing or new campuses, and their
respective off-campus centers and joint use and intersegmental facilities,
as set forth in this chapter.
101052. The Higher Education Facilities Finance Committee
established pursuant to Section 67353 shall authorize the issuance of bonds
under this chapter only to the extent necessary to fund the apportionments
for the purposes described in this chapter that are expressly authorized
by the Legislature in the annual Budget Act. Pursuant to that legislative
direction, the committee shall determine whether or not it is necessary or
desirable to issue bonds authorized pursuant to this chapter in order to
carry out the purposes described in this chapter and, if so, the amount of
bonds to be issued and sold. Successive issues of bonds may be authorized
and sold to carry out those actions progressively, and it is not necessary
that all of the bonds authorized to be issued be sold at any one time.
101053. There shall be collected each year and in the same manner
and at the same time as other state revenue is collected, in addition to
the ordinary revenues of the state, a sum in an amount required to pay
the principal of, and interest on, the bonds each year. It is the duty of all
officers charged by law with any duty in regard to the collection of the
revenue to do and perform each and every act which is necessary to collect
that additional sum.
101054. Notwithstanding Section 13340 of the Government Code,
there is hereby appropriated from the General Fund in the State Treasury,

124 | Text of Proposed Laws

for the purposes of this chapter, an amount that will equal the total of the
following:
(a) The sum annually necessary to pay the principal of, and interest
on, bonds issued and sold pursuant to this chapter, as the principal and
interest become due and payable.
(b) The sum necessary to carry out Section 101057, appropriated
without regard to fiscal years.
101055. The board, as defined in subdivision (b) of Section 101051,
may request the Pooled Money Investment Board to make a loan from the
Pooled Money Investment Account or any other approved form of interim
financing, in accordance with Section 16312 of the Government Code,
for the purpose of carrying out this chapter. The amount of the request
shall not exceed the amount of the unsold bonds that the committee, by
resolution, has authorized to be sold for the purpose of carrying out this
chapter. The board, as defined in subdivision (b) of Section 101051, shall
execute any documents required by the Pooled Money Investment Board
to obtain and repay the loan. Any amounts loaned shall be deposited in the
fund to be allocated by the board in accordance with this chapter.
101056. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, or
of the State General Obligation Bond Law, if the Treasurer sells bonds
pursuant to this chapter that include a bond counsel opinion to the effect
that the interest on the bonds is excluded from gross income for federal
tax purposes, subject to designated conditions, the Treasurer may maintain
separate accounts for the investment of bond proceeds and for the
investment earnings on those proceeds. The Treasurer may use or direct
the use of those proceeds or earnings to pay any rebate, penalty, or other
payment required under federal law or take any other action with respect to
the investment and use of those bond proceeds required or desirable under
federal law to maintain the tax-exempt status of those bonds and to obtain
any other advantage under federal law on behalf of the funds of this state.
101057. (a) For the purposes of carrying out this chapter, the
Director of Finance may authorize the withdrawal from the General Fund
of an amount not to exceed the amount of the unsold bonds that have
been authorized by the Higher Education Facilities Finance Committee
to be sold for the purpose of carrying out this chapter. Any amounts
withdrawn shall be deposited in the 2006 University Capital Outlay Bond
Fund consistent with this chapter. Any money made available under this
section shall be returned to the General Fund, plus an amount equal to the
interest that the money would have earned in the Pooled Money Investment
Account, from proceeds received from the sale of bonds for the purpose of
carrying out this chapter.
(b) Any request forwarded to the Legislature and the Department
of Finance for funds from this bond issue for expenditure for the purposes
described in this chapter by the University of California, the Hastings
College of the Law, or the California State University shall be accompanied
by the five-year capital outlay plan. Requests forwarded by a university
or college shall include a schedule that prioritizes the seismic retrofitting
needed to significantly reduce, in the judgment of the particular university
or college, seismic hazards in buildings identified as high priority by the
university or college.
101058. All money deposited in the 2006 University Capital Outlay
Bond Fund that is derived from premium and accrued interest on bonds
sold shall be reserved in the fund and shall be available for transfer to the
General Fund as a credit to expenditures for bond interest.
101059. The bonds may be refunded in accordance with Article 6
(commencing with Section 16780) of Chapter 4 of Part 3 of Division 4
of Title 2 of the Government Code, which is a part of the State General
Obligation Bond Law. Approval by the voters of the state for the issuance
of the bonds described in this chapter includes the approval of the issuance
of any bonds issued to refund any bonds originally issued under this
chapter or any previously issued refunding bonds.
101060. The Legislature hereby finds and declares that, inasmuch
as the proceeds from the sale of bonds authorized by this chapter are not
“proceeds of taxes” as that term is used in Article XIII B of the California
Constitution, the disbursement of these proceeds is not subject to the
limitations imposed by that article.
SEC. 20. (a) Up to twenty-one million dollars ($21,000,000)
of any funds that are required to be made available for rehabilitation or
construction of joint-use facilities for public schools and that result or are
derived from the sale of bonds issued on or before January 1, 2006, shall be

text of proposed laws

(PROPOSITION 1D CONTINUED)

transferred to the State Allocation Board and may be apportioned by that
board for the purposes of Article 10.6 (commencing with Section 17077.40)
of Chapter 12.5 of Part 10 of the Education Code.
(b) Any funds remaining after the transfer required under subdivision
(a) that conform to the description set forth in that subdivision shall be
transferred to the State Allocation Board and may be apportioned by that
board for any of the purposes of Chapter 12.5 (commencing with Section
17070.10) of Part 10 of the Education Code.

authorized pursuant to Article 2 (commencing with Section 12648) of
Chapter 2 of Part 6 of Division 6 of the Water Code for which the board or
the department has provided the assurances of nonfederal cooperation to
the United States, which shall be updated by the department and compiled
into a single document entitled “The State Plan of Flood Control.”
(k) “Urban area” means any contiguous area in which more than
10,000 residents are protected by project levees.
Article 3.

PROPOSITION 1E
This law proposed by Assembly Bill 140 of the 2005–2006 Regular
Session (Chapter 33, Statutes of 2006) is submitted to the people
in accordance with the provisions of Article XVI of the California
Constitution.
This proposed law adds sections to the Public Resources Code;
therefore, new provisions proposed to be added are printed in italic type to
indicate that they are new.
PROPOSED LAW
SECTION 1. Chapter 1.699 (commencing with Section 5096.800)
is added to Division 5 of the Public Resources Code, to read:

CHAPTER 1.699. DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND
FLOOD PREVENTION BOND ACT OF 2006
Article 1.

General Provisions

5096.800. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the
Disaster Preparedness and Flood Prevention Bond Act of 2006.
Article 2.

Definitions

5096.805. Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions set
forth in this article govern the construction of this chapter.
(a) “Board” means the Reclamation Board or successor entity.
(b) “Committee” means the Disaster Preparedness and Flood
Prevention Bond Finance Committee, created by Section 5096.957.
(c) “Delta” means the area of the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta as
defined in Section 12220 of the Water Code.
(d) “Department” means the Department of Water Resources.
(e) “Facilities of the State Plan of Flood Control” means the levees,
weirs, channels, and other features of the federal and state authorized
flood control facilities located in the Sacramento and San Joaquin River
drainage basin for which the board or the department has given the
assurances of nonfederal cooperation to the United States required for the
project, and those facilities identified in Section 8361 of the Water Code.
(f) “Fund” means the Disaster Preparedness and Flood Prevention
Bond Fund of 2006, created by Section 5096.806.
(g) “Project levees” means the levees that are part of the facilities of
the State Plan of Flood Control.
(h) “Restoration” means the improvement of a physical structure or
facility and, in the case of natural system and landscape features includes,
but is not limited to, a project for the control of erosion, the control and
elimination of exotic species, including prescribed burning, fuel hazard
reduction, fencing out threats to existing or restored natural resources,
road elimination, and other plant and wildlife habitat improvement to
increase the natural system value of the property. A restoration project
shall include the planning, monitoring, and reporting necessary to ensure
successful implementation of the project objectives.
(i) “State General Obligation Bond Law” means the State General
Obligation Bond Law (Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 16720) of
Part 3 of Division 4 of Title 2 of the Government Code).
(j) “State Plan of Flood Control” means the state and federal
flood control works, lands, programs, plans, conditions, and mode of
maintenance and operations of the Sacramento River Flood Control
Project described in Section 8350 of the Water Code, and of flood control
projects in the Sacramento River and San Joaquin River watersheds

Disaster Preparedness and Flood Prevention Bond
Fund of 2006

5096.806. The proceeds of bonds issued and sold pursuant to
this chapter shall be deposited in the Disaster Preparedness and Flood
Prevention Bond Fund of 2006, which is hereby created.
Article 4.

Disaster Preparedness and Flood Prevention Program

5096.820. (a) The sum of four billion ninety million dollars
($4,090,000,000) shall be available, upon appropriation therefor, for
disaster preparedness and flood prevention projects pursuant to this
article.
(b) In expending funds pursuant to this article, the Governor shall
do all of the following:
(1) Secure the maximum feasible amounts of federal and local
matching funds to fund disaster preparedness and flood prevention
projects in order to ensure prudent and cost-effective use of these funds to
the extent that this does not prohibit timely implementation of this article.
(2) Prioritize project selection and project design to achieve
maximum public benefits from the use of these funds.
(3) In connection with the submission of the annual Governor’s
Budget, submit an annual Bond Expenditure Disaster Preparedness and
Flood Prevention Plan that describes in detail the proposed expenditures of
bond funds, the amount of federal appropriations and local funding obtained
to fund disaster preparedness and flood prevention projects to match those
expenditures, and an investment strategy to meet long-term flood protection
needs and minimize state taxpayer liabilities from flooding.
5096.821. Three billion dollars ($3,000,000,000) shall be available,
upon appropriation to the department, for the following purposes:
(a) The evaluation, repair, rehabilitation, reconstruction, or
replacement of levees, weirs, bypasses, and facilities of the State Plan of
Flood Control by all of the following actions:
(1) Repairing erosion sites and removing sediment from channels or
bypasses.
(2) Evaluating and repairing levees and any other facilities of the
State Plan of Flood Control.
(3) Implementing mitigation measures for a project undertaken
pursuant to this subdivision. The department may fund participation in a
natural community conservation plan pursuant to Chapter 10 (commencing
with Section 2800) of Division 3 of the Fish and Game Code to facilitate
projects authorized by this subdivision.
(b) Improving or adding facilities to the State Plan of Flood Control
to increase levels of flood prevention for urban areas, including all related
costs for mitigation and infrastructure relocation. Funds made available by
this subdivision may be expended for state financial participation in federal
and state authorized flood control projects, feasibility studies and design
of federal flood damage reduction and related projects, and reservoir
reoperation and groundwater flood storage projects. Not more than two
hundred million dollars ($200,000,000) may be expended on a single
project, excluding authorized flood control improvements to Folsom Dam.
(c) (1) To reduce the risk of levee failure in the delta.
(2) The funds made available for the purpose specified in paragraph
(1) shall be expended for both of the following purposes:
(A) Local assistance under the delta levee maintenance subventions
program under Part 9 (commencing with Section 12980) of Division 6 of
the Water Code, as that part may be amended.
(B) Special flood protection projects under Chapter 2 (commencing
with Section 12310) of Part 4.8 of Division 6 of the Water Code, as that
chapter may be amended.
5096.824. (a) Five hundred million dollars ($500,000,000) shall

Text of Proposed Laws | 125

1D
1E

text of proposed laws

1E

be available, upon appropriation to the department, for payment for the
state’s share of the nonfederal costs, and related costs, of flood control and
flood prevention projects authorized under any of the following:
(1) The State Water Resources Law of 1945 (Chapter 1 (commencing
with Section 12570) and Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 12639) of
Part 6 of Division 6 of the Water Code).
(2) The Flood Control Law of 1946 (Chapter 3 (commencing with
Section 12800) of Part 6 of Division 6 of the Water Code).
(3) The California Watershed Protection and Flood Prevention Law
(Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 12850) of Part 6 of Division 6 of the
Water Code).
(b) The costs described in subdivision (a) include costs incurred in
connection with either of the following:
(1) The granting of credits or loans to local agencies, as applicable,
pursuant to Sections 12585.3, 12585.4 of, subdivision (d) of Section 12585.5
of, and Sections 12866.3 and 12866.4 of, the Water Code.
(2) The implementation of Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section
12840) of Part 6 of Division 6 of the Water Code.
(c) The funds made available by this section shall be allocated only
to projects that are not part of the State Plan of Flood Control.
5096.825. Two hundred ninety million dollars ($290,000,000)
shall be available, upon appropriation, for the protection, creation, and
enhancement of flood protection corridors and bypasses through any of
the following actions:
(a) Acquiring easements and other interests in real property
to protect or enhance flood protection corridors and bypasses while
preserving or enhancing the agricultural use of the real property.
(b) Constructing new levees necessary for the establishment of a
flood protection corridor or bypass.
(c) Setting back existing flood control levees, and in conjunction
with undertaking those setbacks, strengthening or modifying existing
levees and weirs.
(d) Relocating or flood proofing structures necessary for the
establishment of a flood protection corridor.
(e) Acquiring interests in, or providing incentives for maintaining
agricultural uses of, real property that is located in a flood plain that
cannot reasonably be made safe from future flooding.
(f) Acquiring easements and other interests in real property to protect
or enhance flood protection corridors while preserving or enhancing the
wildlife value of the real property.
(g) Flood plain mapping and related activities, including both of the
following:
(1) The development of flood hazard maps, including all necessary
studies and surveys.
(2) Alluvial fan flood plain mapping.
5096.827. Three hundred million dollars ($300,000,000) shall be
available, upon appropriation to the department, for grants for stormwater
flood management projects that meet all of the following requirements:
(a) Have a nonstate cost share of not less than 50 percent.
(b) Are not part of the State Plan of Flood Control.
(c) Are designed to manage stormwater runoff to reduce flood
damage and where feasible, provide other benefits, including groundwater
recharge, water quality improvement, and ecosystem restoration.
(d) Comply with applicable regional water quality control plans.
(e) Are consistent with any applicable integrated regional water
management plan.
5096.828. Funds provided by this article are only available
for appropriation until July 1, 2016, and at that time the amount of
indebtedness authorized by this chapter shall be reduced by the amount of
funds provided by this article that have not been appropriated.
Article 16.

Program Expenditures

5096.953. The Secretary of the Resources Agency shall provide for
an independent audit of expenditures pursuant to this chapter to ensure
that all moneys are expended in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter. The secretary shall publish a list of all program and project
expenditures pursuant to this chapter not less than annually, in written

126 | Text of Proposed Laws

form, and shall post an electronic form of the list on the Resources Agency’s
Internet Web site.
Article 17.

Fiscal Provisions

5096.955. (a) Bonds in the total amount of four billion ninety
million dollars ($4,090,000,000), not including the amount of any
refunding bonds issued in accordance with Section 5096.966, or so much
thereof as is necessary, may be issued and sold to provide a fund to be used
for carrying out the purposes expressed in this chapter and to reimburse
the General Obligation Bond Expense Revolving Fund pursuant to Section
16724.5 of the Government Code. The bonds, when sold, shall be and
constitute valid and binding obligations of the State of California, and the
full faith and credit of the State of California is hereby pledged for the
punctual payment of both principal of, and interest on, the bonds as the
principal and interest become due and payable.
(b) The Treasurer shall sell the bonds authorized by the committee
pursuant to this section. The bonds shall be sold upon the terms and
conditions specified in a resolution to be adopted by the committee
pursuant to Section 16731 of the Government Code.
5096.956. The bonds authorized by this chapter shall be prepared,
executed, issued, sold, paid, and redeemed as provided in the State General
Obligation Bond Law, and all of the provisions of that law apply to the
bonds and to this chapter and are hereby incorporated in this chapter as
though set forth in full in this chapter.
5096.957. (a) Solely for the purpose of authorizing the issuance
and sale, pursuant to the State General Obligation Bond Law, of the
bonds authorized by this chapter, the Disaster Preparedness and Flood
Prevention Bond Finance Committee is hereby created. For the purposes
of this chapter, the Disaster Preparedness and Flood Prevention Bond
Finance Committee is “the committee” as that term is used in the State
General Obligation Bond Law. The committee consists of the Controller, the
Director of Finance, and the Treasurer, or their designated representatives.
The Treasurer shall serve as chairperson of the committee. A majority of
the committee may act for the committee.
(b) For purposes of the State General Obligation Bond Law, the
department is designated the “board.”
5096.958. The committee shall determine whether or not it is
necessary or desirable to issue bonds authorized pursuant to this chapter
to carry out this chapter and, if so, the amount of bonds to be issued and
sold. Successive issues of bonds may be authorized and sold to carry out
those actions progressively, and it is not necessary that all of the bonds
authorized to be issued be sold at any one time.
5096.959. There shall be collected each year and in the same
manner and at the same time as other state revenue is collected, in addition
to the ordinary revenues of the state, a sum in an amount required to pay
the principal of, and interest on, the bonds each year, and it is the duty of
all officers charged by law with any duty in regard to the collection of the
revenue to do and perform each and every act which is necessary to collect
that additional sum.
5096.960. Notwithstanding Section 13340 of the Government Code,
there is hereby appropriated from the General Fund in the State Treasury,
for the purposes of this chapter, an amount that will equal the total of the
following:
(a) The sum annually necessary to pay the principal of, and interest
on, bonds issued and sold pursuant to this chapter, as the principal and
interest become due and payable.
(b) The sum that is necessary to carry out Section 5096.963,
appropriated without regard to fiscal years.
5096.961. The department may request the Pooled Money Investment
Board to make a loan from the Pooled Money Investment Account, in
accordance with Section 16312 of the Government Code, for the purpose
of carrying out this chapter. The amount of the request shall not exceed
the amount of the unsold bonds that the committee has, by resolution,
authorized to be sold for the purpose of carrying out this chapter. The
department shall execute those documents required by the Pooled Money
Investment Board to obtain and repay the loan. Any amounts loaned shall
be deposited in the fund to be allocated by the department in accordance
with this chapter.
5096.962. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, or
of the State General Obligation Bond Law, if the Treasurer sells bonds that

(PROPOSITION 1E CONTINUED)

include a bond counsel opinion to the effect that the interest on the bonds
is excluded from gross income for federal tax purposes under designated
conditions, the Treasurer may maintain separate accounts for the bond
proceeds invested and for the investment earnings on those proceeds, and
may use or direct the use of those proceeds or earnings to pay any rebate,
penalty, or other payment required under federal law or take any other
action with respect to the investment and use of those bond proceeds, as
may be required or desirable under federal law in order to maintain the
tax-exempt status of those bonds and to obtain any other advantage under
federal law on behalf of the funds of this state.
5096.963. For the purposes of carrying out this chapter, the
Director of Finance may authorize the withdrawal from the General Fund
of an amount or amounts not to exceed the amount of the unsold bonds
that have been authorized by the committee to be sold for the purpose of
carrying out this chapter. Any amounts withdrawn shall be deposited in the
fund. Any money made available under this section shall be returned to the
General Fund, with interest at the rate earned by the money in the Pooled
Money Investment Account, from proceeds received from the sale of bonds
for the purpose of carrying out this chapter.
5096.964. All money deposited in the fund that is derived from
premium and accrued interest on bonds sold pursuant to this chapter shall
be reserved in the fund and shall be available for transfer to the General
Fund as a credit to expenditures for bond interest.
5096.965. Pursuant to Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 16720)
of Part 3 of Division 4 of Title 2 of the Government Code, the cost of bond
issuance shall be paid out of the bond proceeds. These costs shall be shared
proportionally by each program funded through this bond act.
5096.966. The bonds issued and sold pursuant to this chapter may be
refunded in accordance with Article 6 (commencing with Section 16780) of
Chapter 4 of Part 3 of Division 4 of Title 2 of the Government Code, which is
a part of the State General Obligation Bond Law. Approval by the electors
of the state for the issuance of the bonds under this chapter shall include
approval of the issuance of any bonds issued to refund any bonds originally
issued under this chapter or any previously issued refunding bonds.
5096.967. The Legislature hereby finds and declares that, inasmuch
as the proceeds from the sale of bonds authorized by this chapter are not
“proceeds of taxes” as that term is used in Article XIII B of the California
Constitution, the disbursement of these proceeds is not subject to the
limitations imposed by that article.

PROPOSITION 83
This initiative measure is submitted to the people in accordance with
the provisions of Section 8 of Article II of the California Constitution.
This initiative measure amends and adds sections to the Penal Code
and amends sections of the Welfare and Institutions Code; therefore,
existing provisions proposed to be deleted are printed in strikeout type and
new provisions proposed to be added are printed in italic type to indicate
that they are new.
PROPOSED LAW
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE
This Act shall be known and may be cited as “The Sexual Predator
Punishment and Control Act: Jessica’s Law.”
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND DECLARATIONS
The People fi nd and declare each of the following:
(a) The State of California currently places a high priority on
maintaining public safety through a highly skilled and trained law
enforcement as well as laws that deter and punish criminal behavior.
(b) Sex offenders have very high recidivism rates. According to a
1998 report by the U.S. Department of Justice, sex offenders are the least
likely to be cured and the most likely to reoffend, and they prey on the
most innocent members of our society. More than two-thirds of the victims
of rape and sexual assault are under the age of 18. Sex offenders have a
dramatically higher recidivism rate for their crimes than any other type
of violent felon.
(c) Child pornography exploits children and robs them of their
innocence. FBI studies have shown that pornography is very influential
in the actions of sex offenders. Statistics show that 90% of the predators

text of proposed laws
who molest children have had some type of involvement with pornography.
Predators often use child pornography to aid in their molestation.
(d) The universal use of the Internet has also ushered in an era of
increased risk to our children by predators using this technology as a tool
to lure children away from their homes and into dangerous situations.
Therefore, to reflect society’s disapproval of this type of activity, adequate
penalties must be enacted to ensure predators cannot escape prosecution.
(e) With these changes, Californians will be in a better position to
keep themselves, their children, and their communities safe from the threat
posed by sex offenders.
(f) It is the intent of the People in enacting this measure to
help Californians better protect themselves, their children, and their
communities; it is not the intent of the People to embarrass or harass
persons convicted of sex offenses.
(g) Californians have a right to know about the presence of sex
offenders in their communities, near their schools, and around their
children.
(h) California must also take additional steps to monitor sex
offenders, to protect the public from them, and to provide adequate
penalties for and safeguards against sex offenders, particularly those who
prey on children. Existing laws that punish aggravated sexual assault,
habitual sexual offenders, and child molesters must be strengthened and
improved. In addition, existing laws that provide for the commitment and
control of sexually violent predators must be strengthened and improved.
(i) Additional resources are necessary to adequately monitor and
supervise sexual predators and offenders. It is vital that the lasting effects
of the assault do not further victimize victims of sexual assault.
(j) Global Positioning System technology is an useful tool for
monitoring sexual predators and other sex offenders and is a cost effective
measure for parole supervision. It is critical to have close supervision of
this class of criminals to monitor these offenders and prevent them from
committing other crimes.
(k) California is the only state, of the number of states that have
enacted laws allowing involuntary civil commitments for persons identified
as sexually violent predators, which does not provide for indeterminate
commitments. California automatically allows for a jury trial every two
years irrespective of whether there is any evidence to suggest or prove that
the committed person is no longer a sexually violent predator. As such, this
act allows California to protect the civil rights of those persons committed
as a sexually violent predator while at the same time protect society and the
system from unnecessary or frivolous jury trial actions where there is no
competent evidence to suggest a change in the committed person.
SEC. 3. Section 209 of the Penal Code is amended to read:
209. (a) Any person who seizes, confi nes, inveigles, entices,
decoys, abducts, conceals, kidnaps or carries away another person by any
means whatsoever with intent to hold or detain, or who holds or detains,
that person for ransom, reward or to commit extortion or to exact from
another person any money or valuable thing, or any person who aids or
abets any such act, is guilty of a felony, and upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished by imprisonment in the state prison for life without
possibility of parole in cases in which any person subjected to any such
act suffers death or bodily harm, or is intentionally confi ned in a manner
which exposes that person to a substantial likelihood of death, or shall be
punished by imprisonment in the state prison for life with the possibility of
parole in cases where no such person suffers death or bodily harm.
(b)(1) Any person who kidnaps or carries away any individual to
commit robbery, rape, spousal rape, oral copulation, sodomy, or sexual
penetration in any violation of Section 264.1, 288, or 289, shall be punished
by imprisonment in the state prison for life with the possibility of parole.
(2) This subdivision shall only apply if the movement of the victim
is beyond that merely incidental to the commission of, and increases the
risk of harm to the victim over and above that necessarily present in, the
intended underlying offense.
(c) In all cases in which probation is granted, the court shall, except
in unusual cases where the interests of justice would best be served by a
lesser penalty, require as a condition of the probation that the person be
confi ned in the county jail for 12 months. If the court grants probation
without requiring the defendant to be confi ned in the county jail for 12
months, it shall specify its reason or reasons for imposing a lesser penalty.
(d) Subdivision (b) shall not be construed to supersede or affect

Text of Proposed Laws | 127

1E
83

text of proposed laws

83

Section 667.61. A person may be charged with a violation of subdivision
(b) and Section 667.61. However, a person may not be punished under
subdivision (b) and Section 667.61 for the same act that constitutes a
violation of both subdivision (b) and Section 667.61.
SEC. 4. Section 220 of the Penal Code is amended to read:
220. Every (a) Except as provided in subdivision (b), any person
who assaults another with intent to commit mayhem, rape, sodomy, oral
copulation, or any violation of Section 264.1, 288, or 289 is punishable shall
be punished by imprisonment in the state prison for two, four, or six years.
(b) Any person who, in the commission of a burglary of the first
degree, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 460, assaults another with
intent to commit rape, sodomy, oral copulation, or any violation of Section
264.1, 288, or 289 shall be punished by imprisonment in the state prison for
life with the possibility of parole.
SEC. 5. Section 269 of the Penal Code is amended to read:
269. (a) Any person who commits any of the following acts upon a
child who is under 14 years of age and 10 seven or more years younger than
the person is guilty of aggravated sexual assault of a child:
(1) A Rape, in violation of paragraph (2) or (6) of subdivision (a) of
Section 261.
(2) A Rape or sexual penetration, in concert, in violation of Section
264.1.
(3) Sodomy, in violation of paragraph (2) or (3) of subdivision (c),
or subdivision (d), of Section 286, when committed by force, violence,
duress, menace, or fear of immediate and unlawful bodily injury on the
victim or another person.
(4) Oral copulation, in violation of paragraph (2) or (3) of
subdivision (c), or subdivision (d), of Section 288a, when committed by
force, violence, duress, menace, or fear of immediate and unlawful bodily
injury on the victim or another person.
(5) A Sexual penetration, in violation of subdivision (a) of Section 289.
(b) Any person who violates this section is guilty of a felony and
shall be punished by imprisonment in the state prison for 15 years to life.
(c) The court shall impose a consecutive sentence for each offense
that results in a conviction under this section if the crimes involve separate
victims or involve the same victim on separate occasions as defined in
subdivision (d) of Section 667.6.
SEC. 6. Section 288.3 is added to the Penal Code, to read:
288.3. (a) Every person who contacts or communicates with a
minor, or attempts to contact or communicate with a minor, who knows
or reasonably should know that the person is a minor, with intent to
commit an offense specified in Section 207, 209, 261, 264.1, 273a, 286, 288,
288a, 288.2, 289, 311.1, 311.2, 311.4 or 311.11 involving the minor shall be
punished by imprisonment in the state prison for the term prescribed for an
attempt to commit the intended offense.
(b) As used in this section, “contacts or communicates with”
shall include direct and indirect contact or communication that may be
achieved personally or by use of an agent or agency, any print medium,
any postal service, a common carrier or communication common carrier,
any electronic communications system, or any telecommunications, wire,
computer, or radio communications device or system.
(c) A person convicted of a violation of subdivision (a) who has
previously been convicted of a violation of subdivision (a) shall be
punished by an additional and consecutive term of imprisonment in the
state prison for five years.
SEC. 7. Section 290.3 of the Penal Code is amended to read:
290.3. (a) Every person who is convicted of any offense specified
in subdivision (a) of Section 290 shall, in addition to any imprisonment or
fi ne, or both, imposed for violation commission of the underlying offense,
be punished by a fi ne of two three hundred dollars ($200) ($300) upon the
fi rst conviction or a fi ne of three five hundred dollars ($300) ($500) upon
the second and each subsequent conviction, unless the court determines
that the defendant does not have the ability to pay the fi ne.
An amount equal to all fi nes collected pursuant to this subdivision
during the preceding month upon conviction of, or upon the forfeiture of
bail by, any person arrested for, or convicted of, committing an offense
specified in subdivision (a) of Section 290, shall be transferred once a
month by the county treasurer to the Controller for deposit in the General
Fund. Moneys deposited in the General Fund pursuant to this subdivision

128 | Text of Proposed Laws

shall be transferred by the Controller as provided in subdivision (b).
(b) Out Except as provided in subdivision (d), out of the moneys
deposited pursuant to subdivision (a) as a result of second and subsequent
convictions of Section 290, one-third shall fi rst be transferred to the
Department of Justice Sexual Habitual Offender Fund, as provided in
paragraph (1) of this subdivision. Out of the remainder of all moneys
deposited pursuant to subdivision (a), 50 percent shall be transferred to
the Department of Justice Sexual Habitual Offender Fund, as provided in
paragraph (1), 25 percent shall be transferred to the Department of Justice
DNA Testing Fund, as provided in paragraph (2), and 25 percent shall be
allocated equally to counties that maintain a local DNA testing laboratory,
as provided in paragraph (3).
(1) Those moneys so designated shall be transferred to the
Department of Justice Sexual Habitual Offender Fund created pursuant to
paragraph (5) of subdivision (b) of Section 11170 and, when appropriated by
the Legislature, shall be used for the purposes of Chapter 9.5 (commencing
with Section 13885) and Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 13890)
of Title 6 of Part 4 for the purpose of monitoring, apprehending, and
prosecuting sexual habitual offenders.
(2) Those moneys so designated shall be directed to the Department
of Justice and transferred to the Department of Justice DNA Testing
Fund, which is hereby created, for the exclusive purpose of testing
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) samples for law enforcement purposes. The
moneys in that fund shall be available for expenditure upon appropriation
by the Legislature.
(3) Those moneys so designated shall be allocated equally and
distributed quarterly to counties that maintain a local DNA testing
laboratory. Before making any allocations under this paragraph, the
Controller shall deduct the estimated costs that will be incurred to set up and
administer the payment of these funds to the counties. Any funds allocated
to a county pursuant to this paragraph shall be used by that county for the
exclusive purpose of testing DNA samples for law enforcement purposes.
(c) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the
Department of Corrections or the Department of the Youth Authority may
collect a fi ne imposed pursuant to this section from a person convicted of a
violation of any offense listed in subdivision (a) of Section 290, that results
in incarceration in a facility under the jurisdiction of the Department
of Corrections or the Department of the Youth Authority. All moneys
collected by the Department of Corrections or the Department of the Youth
Authority under this subdivision shall be transferred, once a month, to the
Controller for deposit in the General Fund, as provided in subdivision (a),
for transfer by the Controller, as provided in subdivision (b).
(d) An amount equal to one hundred dollars for every fine imposed
pursuant to subdivision (a) in excess of one hundred dollars shall be
transferred to the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation to defray
the cost of the global positioning system used to monitor sex offender
parolees.
SEC. 8. Section 311.11 of the Penal Code is amended to read:
311.11. (a) Every person who knowingly possesses or controls any
matter, representation of information, data, or image, including, but not
limited to, any film, filmstrip, photograph, negative, slide, photocopy,
videotape, video laser disc, computer hardware, computer software,
computer floppy disc, data storage media, CD-ROM, or computergenerated equipment or any other computer-generated image that contains
or incorporates in any manner, any film or filmstrip, the production of
which involves the use of a person under the age of 18 years, knowing
that the matter depicts a person under the age of 18 years personally
engaging in or simulating sexual conduct, as defi ned in subdivision (d) of
Section 311.4, is guilty of a public offense felony and shall be punished by
imprisonment in the state prison, or a county jail for up to one year, or by a
fi ne not exceeding two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500), or by both
the fi ne and imprisonment.
(b) If a Every person who commits a violation of subdivision (a), and
who has been previously convicted of a violation of this section, or of a
violation of subdivision (b) of Section 311.2, or subdivision (b) of Section
311.4, he or she an offense described in subparagraph (A) of paragraph
(2) of subdivision (a) of Section 290, or an attempt to commit any of the
above-mentioned offenses, is guilty of a felony and shall be punished by
imprisonment in the state prison for two, four, or six years.
(c) It is not necessary to prove that the matter is obscene in order to
establish a violation of this section.

(PROPOSITION 83 CONTINUED)

(d) This section does not apply to drawings, figurines, statues, or any
film rated by the Motion Picture Association of America, nor does it apply
to live or recorded telephone messages when transmitted, disseminated, or
distributed as part of a commercial transaction.
SEC. 9. Section 667.5 of the Penal Code is amended to read:
667.5. Enhancement of prison terms for new offenses because of
prior prison terms shall be imposed as follows:
(a) Where one of the new offenses is one of the violent felonies
specified in subdivision (c), in addition to and consecutive to any other
prison terms therefor, the court shall impose a three-year term for each
prior separate prison term served by the defendant where the prior offense
was one of the violent felonies specified in subdivision (c). However, no
additional term shall be imposed under this subdivision for any prison
term served prior to a period of 10 years in which the defendant remained
free of both prison custody and the commission of an offense which results
in a felony conviction.
(b) Except where subdivision (a) applies, where the new offense is any
felony for which a prison sentence is imposed, in addition and consecutive
to any other prison terms therefor, the court shall impose a one-year term
for each prior separate prison term served for any felony; provided that
no additional term shall be imposed under this subdivision for any prison
term served prior to a period of five years in which the defendant remained
free of both prison custody and the commission of an offense which results
in a felony conviction.
(c) For the purpose of this section, “violent felony” shall mean any
of the following:
(1) Murder or voluntary manslaughter.
(2) Mayhem.
(3) Rape as defi ned in paragraph (2) or (6) of subdivision (a) of
Section 261 or paragraph (1) or (4) of subdivision (a) of Section 262.
(4) Sodomy by force, violence, duress, menace, or fear of immediate
and unlawful bodily injury on the victim or another person as defined in
subdivision (c) or (d) of Section 286.
(5) Oral copulation by force, violence, duress, menace, or fear of
immediate and unlawful bodily injury on the victim or another person as
defined in subdivision (c) or (d) of Section 288a.
(6) Lewd acts on a child under the age of 14 years or lascivious act
as defi ned in subdivision (a) or (b) of Section 288.
(7) Any felony punishable by death or imprisonment in the state
prison for life.
(8) Any felony in which the defendant inflicts great bodily injury
on any person other than an accomplice which has been charged and
proved as provided for in Section 12022.7, 12022.8, or 12022.9 on or after
July 1, 1977, or as specified prior to July 1, 1977, in Sections 213, 264, and
461, or any felony in which the defendant uses a fi rearm which use has been
charged and proved as provided in subdivision (a) of Section 12022.3, or
Section 12022.5 or 12022.55.
(9) Any robbery.
(10) Arson, in violation of subdivision (a) or (b) of Section 451.
(11) The offense Sexual penetration as defi ned in subdivision (a) or
(j) of Section 289 where the act is accomplished against the victim’s will by
force, violence, duress, menace, or fear of immediate and unlawful bodily
injury on the victim or another person.
(12) Attempted murder.
(13) A violation of Section 12308, 12309, or 12310.
(14) Kidnapping.
(15) Assault with the intent to commit mayhem, rape, sodomy, or
oral copulation a specified felony, in violation of Section 220.
(16) Continuous sexual abuse of a child, in violation of Section
288.5.
(17) Carjacking, as defi ned in subdivision (a) of Section 215.
(18) A Rape, spousal rape, or sexual penetration, in concert, in
violation of Section 264.1.
(19) Extortion, as defi ned in Section 518, which would constitute a
felony violation of Section 186.22 of the Penal Code.
(20) Threats to victims or witnesses, as defi ned in Section 136.1,
which would constitute a felony violation of Section 186.22 of the Penal
Code.

text of proposed laws
(21) Any burglary of the fi rst degree, as defi ned in subdivision (a) of
Section 460, wherein it is charged and proved that another person, other
than an accomplice, was present in the residence during the commission
of the burglary.
(22) Any violation of Section 12022.53.
(23) A violation of subdivision (b) or (c) of Section 11418. The
Legislature fi nds and declares that these specified crimes merit special
consideration when imposing a sentence to display society’s condemnation
for these extraordinary crimes of violence against the person.
(d) For the purposes of this section, the defendant shall be deemed
to remain in prison custody for an offense until the official discharge
from custody or until release on parole, whichever fi rst occurs, including
any time during which the defendant remains subject to reimprisonment
for escape from custody or is reimprisoned on revocation of parole. The
additional penalties provided for prior prison terms shall not be imposed
unless they are charged and admitted or found true in the action for the
new offense.
(e) The additional penalties provided for prior prison terms shall not
be imposed for any felony for which the defendant did not serve a prior
separate term in state prison.
(f) A prior conviction of a felony shall include a conviction in another
jurisdiction for an offense which, if committed in California, is punishable
by imprisonment in the state prison if the defendant served one year or
more in prison for the offense in the other jurisdiction. A prior conviction
of a particular felony shall include a conviction in another jurisdiction for
an offense which includes all of the elements of the particular felony as
defi ned under California law if the defendant served one year or more in
prison for the offense in the other jurisdiction.
(g) A prior separate prison term for the purposes of this section shall
mean a continuous completed period of prison incarceration imposed for the
particular offense alone or in combination with concurrent or consecutive
sentences for other crimes, including any reimprisonment on revocation
of parole which is not accompanied by a new commitment to prison, and
including any reimprisonment after an escape from incarceration.
(h) Serving a prison term includes any confi nement time in any state
prison or federal penal institution as punishment for commission of an
offense, including confi nement in a hospital or other institution or facility
credited as service of prison time in the jurisdiction of the confi nement.
(i) For the purposes of this section, a commitment to the State
Department of Mental Health as a mentally disordered sex offender
following a conviction of a felony, which commitment exceeds one year in
duration, shall be deemed a prior prison term.
(j) For the purposes of this section, when a person subject to the
custody, control, and discipline of the Director of Corrections is incarcerated
at a facility operated by the Department of the Youth Authority, that
incarceration shall be deemed to be a term served in state prison.
(k) Notwithstanding subdivisions (d) and (g) or any other provision
of law, where one of the new offenses is committed while the defendant is
temporarily removed from prison pursuant to Section 2690 or while the
defendant is transferred to a community facility pursuant to Section 3416,
6253, or 6263, or while the defendant is on furlough pursuant to Section
6254, the defendant shall be subject to the full enhancements provided for
in this section.
This subdivision shall not apply when a full, separate, and consecutive
term is imposed pursuant to any other provision of law.
SEC. 10. Section 667.51 of the Penal Code is amended to read:
667.51. (a) Any person who is found guilty convicted of violating
Section 288 or 288.5 shall receive a five-year enhancement for a prior
conviction of an offense listed specified in subdivision (b), provided that
no additional term shall be imposed under this subdivision for any prison
term served prior to a period of 10 years in which the defendant remained
free of both prison custody and the commission of an offense that results
in a felony conviction.
(b) Section 261, 262, 264.1, 269, 285, 286, 288, 288a, 288.5, or 289,
or any offense committed in another jurisdiction that includes all of the
elements of any of the offenses set forth specified in this subdivision.
(c) Section 261, 264.1, 286, 288, 288a, 288.5, or 289, or any offense
committed in another jurisdiction that includes all of the elements of any
of the offenses set forth in this subdivision.
(d) A violation of Section 288 or 288.5 by a person who has been

Text of Proposed Laws | 129

83

text of proposed laws

83

previously convicted two or more times of an offense listed specified
in subdivision (c) is punishable as a felony (b) shall be punished by
imprisonment in the state prison for 15 years to life. However, if the two or
more prior convictions were for violations of Section 288, this subdivision
is applicable only if the current violation or at least one of the prior
convictions is for an offense other than a violation of subdivision (a) of
Section 288. For purposes of this subdivision, a prior conviction is required
to have been for charges brought and tried separately. The provisions of
Article 2.5 (commencing with Section 2930) of Chapter 7 of Title 1 of
Part 3 shall apply to reduce any minimum term in a state prison imposed
pursuant to this section, but that person shall not otherwise be released on
parole prior to that time.
SEC. 11. Section 667.6 of the Penal Code is amended to read:
667.6. (a) Any person who is found guilty of violating paragraph
(2), (3), (6), or (7) of subdivision (a) of Section 261, paragraph (1), (4),
or (5) of subdivision (a) of Section 262, Section 264.1, subdivision (b) of
Section 288, Section 288.5 or subdivision (a) of Section 289, of committing
sodomy in violation of subdivision (k) of Section 286, of committing oral
copulation in violation of subdivision (k) of Section 288a, or of committing
sodomy or oral copulation in violation of Section 286 or 288a by force,
violence, duress, menace, or fear of immediate and unlawful bodily
injury on the victim or another person convicted of an offense specified
in subdivision (e) and who has been convicted previously of any of those
offenses shall receive a five-year enhancement for each of those prior
convictions provided that no enhancement shall be imposed under this
subdivision for any conviction occurring prior to a period of 10 years in
which the person remained free of both prison custody and the commission
of an offense which results in a felony conviction. In addition to the fiveyear enhancement imposed under this subdivision, the court also may
impose a fi ne not to exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) for anyone
sentenced under these provisions. The fi ne imposed and collected pursuant
to this subdivision shall be deposited in the Victim Witness Assistance
Fund to be available for appropriation to fund child sexual exploitation
and child sexual abuse victim counseling centers and prevention programs
established pursuant to Section 13837.
(b) Any person who is convicted of an offense specified in
subdivision (a) (e) and who has served two or more prior prison terms
as defi ned in Section 667.5 for any offense specified in subdivision (a), of
those offenses shall receive a 10-year enhancement for each of those prior
terms provided that no additional enhancement shall be imposed under
this subdivision for any prison term served prior to a period of 10 years in
which the person remained free of both prison custody and the commission
of an offense which results in a felony conviction. In addition to the 10-year
enhancement imposed under this subdivision, the court also may impose
a fi ne not to exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) for any person
sentenced under this subdivision. The fi ne imposed and collected pursuant
to this subdivision shall be deposited in the Victim Witness Assistance
Fund to be available for appropriation to fund child sexual exploitation
and child sexual abuse victim counseling centers and prevention programs
established pursuant to Section 13837.
(c) In lieu of the term provided in Section 1170.1, a full, separate,
and consecutive term may be imposed for each violation of Section 220,
other than an assault with intent to commit mayhem, provided that the
person has been convicted previously of violating Section 220 for an
offense other than an assault with intent to commit mayhem, paragraph
(2), (3), (6), or (7) of subdivision (a) of Section 261, paragraph (1), (4),
or (5) of subdivision (a) of Section 262, Section 264.1, subdivision (b) of
Section 288, Section 288.5 or subdivision (a) of Section 289, of committing
sodomy in violation of subdivision (k) of Section 286, of committing oral
copulation in violation of subdivision (k) of Section 288a, or of committing
sodomy or oral copulation in violation of Section 286 or 288a by force,
violence, duress, menace, or fear of immediate and unlawful bodily injury
on the victim or another person whether or not the crimes were committed
during a single transaction an offense specified in subdivision (e) if the
crimes involve the same victim on the same occasion. A term may be
imposed consecutively pursuant to this subdivision if a person is convicted
of at least one offense specified in subdivision (e). If the term is imposed
consecutively pursuant to this subdivision, it shall be served consecutively
to any other term of imprisonment, and shall commence from the time the
person otherwise would have been released from imprisonment. The term
shall not be included in any determination pursuant to Section 1170.1. Any
other term imposed subsequent to that term shall not be merged therein but

130 | Text of Proposed Laws

shall commence at the time the person otherwise would have been released
from prison.
(d) A full, separate, and consecutive term shall be served imposed
for each violation of Section 220, other than an assault with intent to
commit mayhem, provided that the person has been convicted previously
of violating Section 220 for an offense other than an assault with intent
to commit mayhem, paragraph (2), (3), (6), or (7) of subdivision (a) of
Section 261, paragraph (1), (4), or (5) of subdivision (a) of Section 262,
Section 264.1, subdivision (b) of Section 288, subdivision (a) of Section
289, of committing sodomy in violation of subdivision (k) of Section 286,
of committing oral copulation in violation of subdivision (k) of Section
288a, or of committing sodomy or oral copulation in violation of Section
286 or 288a by force, violence, duress, menace, or fear of immediate and
unlawful bodily injury on the victim or another person an offense specified
in subdivision (e) if the crimes involve separate victims or involve the
same victim on separate occasions.
In determining whether crimes against a single victim were
committed on separate occasions under this subdivision, the court shall
consider whether, between the commission of one sex crime and another,
the defendant had a reasonable opportunity to reflect upon his or her
actions and nevertheless resumed sexually assaultive behavior. Neither the
duration of time between crimes, nor whether or not the defendant lost
or abandoned his or her opportunity to attack, shall be, in and of itself,
determinative on the issue of whether the crimes in question occurred on
separate occasions.
The term shall be served consecutively to any other term of
imprisonment and shall commence from the time the person otherwise
would have been released from imprisonment. The term shall not be included
in any determination pursuant to Section 1170.1. Any other term imposed
subsequent to that term shall not be merged therein but shall commence at
the time the person otherwise would have been released from prison.
(e) This section shall apply to the following offenses:
(1) Rape, in violation of paragraph (2), (3), (6), or (7) of subdivision
(a) of Section 261.
(2) Spousal rape, in violation of paragraph (1), (4), or (5) of
subdivision (a) of Section 262.
(3) Rape, spousal rape, or sexual penetration, in concert, in violation
of Section 264.1.
(4) Sodomy, in violation of paragraph (2) or (3) of subdivision (c),
or subdivision (d) or (k), of Section 286.
(5) Lewd or lascivious act, in violation of subdivision (b) of Section
288.
(6) Continuous sexual abuse of a child, in violation of Section
288.5.
(7) Oral copulation, in violation of paragraph (2) or (3) of
subdivision (c), or subdivision (d) or (k), of Section 288a.
(8) Sexual penetration, in violation of subdivision (a) or (g) of
Section 289.
(9) As a present offense under subdivision (c) or (d), assault with
intent to commit a specified sexual offense, in violation of Section 220.
(10) As a prior conviction under subdivision (a) or (b), an offense
committed in another jurisdiction that includes all of the elements of an
offense specified in this subdivision.
(f) In addition to any enhancement imposed pursuant to subdivision
(a) or (b), the court may also impose a fine not to exceed twenty thousand
dollars ($20,000) for anyone sentenced under those provisions. The fine
imposed and collected pursuant to this subdivision shall be deposited in
the Victim-Witness Assistance Fund to be available for appropriation to
fund child sexual exploitation and child sexual abuse victim counseling
centers and prevention programs established pursuant to Section 13837.
If the court orders a fi ne to be imposed pursuant to this subdivision (a)
or (b), the actual administrative cost of collecting that fi ne, not to exceed
2 percent of the total amount paid, may be paid into the general fund of the
county treasury for the use and benefit of the county.
SEC. 12. Section 667.61 of the Penal Code is amended to read:
667.61. (a) A Any person who is convicted of an offense specified
in subdivision (c) under one or more of the circumstances specified in
subdivision (d) or under two or more of the circumstances specified in
subdivision (e) shall be punished by imprisonment in the state prison for
25 years to life and shall not be eligible for release on parole for 25 years

(PROPOSITION 83 CONTINUED)

except as provided in subdivision (j).
(b) Except as provided in subdivision (a), a any person who is convicted
of an offense specified in subdivision (c) under one of the circumstances
specified in subdivision (e) shall be punished by imprisonment in the state
prison for 15 years to life and shall not be eligible for release on parole for
15 years except as provided in subdivision (j).
(c) This section shall apply to any of the following offenses:
(1) A Rape, in violation of paragraph (2) or (6) of subdivision (a) of
Section 261.
(2) A Spousal rape, in violation of paragraph (1) or (4) of subdivision
(a) of Section 262.
(3) A Rape, spousal rape, or sexual penetration, in concert, in
violation of Section 264.1.
(4) A Lewd or lascivious act, in violation of subdivision (b) of
Section 288.
(5) A Sexual penetration, in violation of subdivision (a) of Section
289.
(6) Sodomy or oral copulation Sodomy, in violation of paragraph
(2) or (3) of subdivision (c), or subdivision (d), of Section 286 or 288a by
force, violence, duress, menace, or fear of immediate and unlawful bodily
injury on the victim or another person.
(7) A Oral copulation, in violation of paragraph (2) or (3) of
subdivision (c), or subdivision (d), of Section 288a.
(8) Lewd or lascivious act, in violation of subdivision (a) of Section
288, unless the defendant qualifies for probation under subdivision (c) of
Section 1203.066.
(9) Continuous sexual abuse of a child, in violation of Section
288.5.
(d) The following circumstances shall apply to the offenses specified
in subdivision (c):
(1) The defendant has been previously convicted of an offense
specified in subdivision (c), including an offense committed in another
jurisdiction that includes all of the elements of an offense specified in
subdivision (c).
(2) The defendant kidnapped the victim of the present offense and
the movement of the victim substantially increased the risk of harm to
the victim over and above that level of risk necessarily inherent in the
underlying offense in subdivision (c).
(3) The defendant inflicted aggravated mayhem or torture on the
victim or another person in the commission of the present offense in
violation of Section 205 or 206.
(4) The defendant committed the present offense during the
commission of a burglary of the first degree, as defi ned in subdivision (a) of
Section 460, with intent to commit an offense specified in subdivision (c).
(5) The defendant committed the present offense in violation of
Section 264.1, subdivision (d) of Section 286, or subdivision (d) of Section
288a, and, in the commission of that offense, any person committed any act
described in paragraph (2), (3), or (4) of this subdivision.
(e) The following circumstances shall apply to the offenses specified
in subdivision (c):
(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of subdivision (d), the
defendant kidnapped the victim of the present offense in violation of
Section 207, 209, or 209.5.
(2) Except as provided in paragraph (4) of subdivision (d), the
defendant committed the present offense during the commission of a
burglary, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 460, or during the commission
of a burglary of a building, including any commercial establishment, which
was then closed to the public, in violation of Section 459.
(3) The defendant personally inflicted great bodily injury on the
victim or another person in the commission of the present offense in
violation of Section 12022.53, 12022.7, or 12022.8.
(4) The defendant personally used a dangerous or deadly weapon or
a fi rearm in the commission of the present offense in violation of Section
12022, 12022.3, 12022.5, or 12022.53.
(5) The defendant has been convicted in the present case or cases of
committing an offense specified in subdivision (c) against more than one
victim.
(6) The defendant engaged in the tying or binding of the victim or

text of proposed laws
another person in the commission of the present offense.
(7) The defendant administered a controlled substance to the victim
by force, violence, or fear in the commission of the present offense in
violation of Section 12022.75.
(8) The defendant committed the present offense in violation of
Section 264.1, subdivision (d) of Section 286, or subdivision (d) of Section
288a, and, in the commission of that offense, any person committed any
act described in paragraph (1), (2), (3), (4), (6), or (7) of this subdivision.
(f) If only the minimum number of circumstances specified
in subdivision (d) or (e) which that are required for the punishment
provided in subdivision (a) or (b) to apply have been pled and proved, that
circumstance or those circumstances shall be used as the basis for imposing
the term provided in subdivision (a) or (b), whichever is greater, rather
than being used to impose the punishment authorized under any other
provision of law, unless another provision of law provides for a greater
penalty or the punishment under another provision of law can be imposed
in addition to the punishment provided by this section. However, if any
additional circumstance or circumstances specified in subdivision (d) or
(e) have been pled and proved, the minimum number of circumstances
shall be used as the basis for imposing the term provided in subdivision
(a), and any other additional circumstance or circumstances shall be used
to impose any punishment or enhancement authorized under any other
provision of law.
(g) Notwithstanding Section 1385 or any other provision of law, the
court shall not strike any allegation, admission, or finding of any of the
circumstances specified in subdivision (d) or (e) for any person who is
subject to punishment under this section.
(g) The term specified in subdivision (a) or (b) shall be imposed on
the defendant once for any offense or offenses committed against a single
victim during a single occasion. If there are multiple victims during a single
occasion, the term specified in subdivision (a) or (b) shall be imposed on
the defendant once for each separate victim. Terms for other offenses
committed during a single occasion shall be imposed as authorized under
any other law, including Section 667.6, if applicable.
(h) Probation Notwithstanding any other provision of law, probation
shall not be granted to, nor shall the execution or imposition of sentence be
suspended for, any person who is subject to punishment under this section for
any offense specified in paragraphs (1) to (6), inclusive, of subdivision (c).
(i) For the any offense specified in paragraphs (1) to (7), inclusive,
of subdivision (c), the court shall impose a consecutive sentence for each
offense that results in a conviction under this section if the crimes involve
separate victims or involve the same victim on separate occasions as
defined in subdivision (d) of Section 667.6.
(j) The penalties provided in this section to shall apply, only if the
existence of any fact required under circumstance specified in subdivision
(d) or (e) shall be is alleged in the accusatory pleading pursuant to this
section, and is either admitted by the defendant in open court or found to
be true by the trier of fact.
(j) Article 2.5 (commencing with Section 2930) of Chapter 7 of
Title 1 of Part 3 shall apply to reduce the minimum term of 25 years in the
state prison imposed pursuant to subdivision (a) or 15 years in the state
prison imposed pursuant to subdivision (b). However, in no case shall the
minimum term of 25 or 15 years be reduced by more than 15 percent for
credits granted pursuant to Section 2933, 4019, or any other law providing
for conduct credit reduction. In no case shall any person who is punished
under this section be released on parole prior to serving at least 85 percent
of the minimum term of 25 or 15 years in the state prison.
SEC. 13. Section 667.71 of the Penal Code amended to read:
667.71. (a) For the purpose of this section, a habitual sexual
offender is a person who has been previously convicted of one or more of
the offenses listed specified in subdivision (c) and who is convicted in the
present proceeding of one of those offenses.
(b) A habitual sexual offender is punishable shall be punished
by imprisonment in the state prison for 25 years to life. Article 2.5
(commencing with Section 2930) of Chapter 7 of Title 1 of Part 3 shall
apply to reduce any minimum term of 25 years in the state prison imposed
pursuant to this section. However, in no case shall the minimum term of 25
years be reduced by more than 15 percent for credits granted pursuant to
Section 2933, 4019, or any other law providing for conduct credit reduction.
In no case shall any person who is punished under this section be released
on parole prior to serving at least 85 percent of the minimum term of 25

Text of Proposed Laws | 131

83

text of proposed laws

83

years in the state prison.
(c) This section shall apply to any of the following offenses:
(1) A Rape, in violation of paragraph (2) or (6) of subdivision (a) of
Section 261.
(2) A Spousal rape, in violation of paragraph (1) or (4) of subdivision
(a) of Section 262.
(3) A Rape, spousal rape, or sexual penetration, in concert, in
violation of Section 264.1.
(4) A Lewd or lascivious act, in violation of subdivision (a) or (b)
of Section 288.
(5) A Sexual penetration, in violation of subdivision (a) or (j) of
Section 289.
(6) A Continuous sexual abuse of a child, in violation of Section
288.5.
(7) A Sodomy, in violation of subdivision (c) or (d) of Section 286 by
force, violence, duress, menace, or fear of immediate and unlawful bodily
injury on the victim or another person.
(8) A violation of subdivision (d) of Section 286.
(9) A Oral copulation, in violation of subdivision (c) or (d) of Section
288a by force, violence, duress, menace, or fear of immediate and unlawful
bodily injury on the victim or another person.
(10) A (9) Kidnapping, in violation of subdivision (b) of Section 207.
(11) A (10) Kidnapping, in violation of former subdivision (d) of
Section 208 (kidnapping to commit specified sex offenses).
(12) (11) Kidnapping, in violation of subdivision (b) of Section 209
with the intent to commit rape, spousal rape, oral copulation, or sodomy or
sexual penetration in violation of Section 289 a specified sexual offense.
(13) A (12) Aggravated sexual assault of a child, in violation of
Section 269.
(14) (13) An offense committed in another jurisdiction that has
includes all of the elements of an offense specified in paragraphs (1) to
(13), inclusive, of this subdivision.
(d) Notwithstanding Section 1385 or any other provision of law, the
court shall not strike any allegation, admission, or finding of any prior
conviction specified in subdivision (c) for any person who is subject to
punishment under this section.
(e) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, probation shall not be
granted to, nor shall the execution or imposition of sentence be suspended
for, any person who is subject to punishment under this section.
(f) This section shall apply only if the defendant’s status as a habitual
sexual offender is alleged in the information accusatory pleading, and
either admitted by the defendant in open court, or found to be true by the
jury trying the issue of guilt or by the court where guilt is established by a
plea of guilty or nolo contendere or by trial by court sitting without a jury
trier of fact.
SEC. 14. Section 1203.06 of the Penal Code is amended to read:
1203.06. Notwithstanding Section 1203:
(a) Probation Notwithstanding any other provision of law, probation
shall not be granted to, nor shall the execution or imposition of sentence be
suspended for, nor shall a finding bringing the defendant within this section
be stricken pursuant to Section 1385 for, any of the following persons:
(1) Any person who personally used a fi rearm during the commission
or attempted commission of any of the following crimes:
(A) Murder.
(B) Robbery, in violation of Section 211.
(C) Kidnapping, in violation of Section 207, 209, or 209.5.
(D) Kidnapping in violation of Section 209 Lewd or lascivious act,
in violation of Section 288.
(E) Burglary of the fi rst degree, as defi ned in Section 460.
(F) Except as provided in Section 1203.065, rape Rape, in violation
of paragraph (2) of subdivision (a) of Section 261, 262, or 264.1.
(G) Assault with intent to commit rape or sodomy a specified sexual
offense, in violation of Section 220.
(H) Escape, in violation of Section 4530 or 4532.
(I) Carjacking, in violation of Section 215.
(J) Any person convicted of aggravated Aggravated mayhem, in

132 | Text of Proposed Laws

violation of Section 205.
(K) Torture, in violation of Section 206.
(L) Kidnapping, in violation of Section 209.5 Continuous sexual
abuse of a child, in violation of Section 288.5.
(M) A felony violation of Section 136.1 or 137.
(N) Sodomy, in violation of Section 286.
(O) Oral copulation, in violation of Section 288a.
(P) Sexual penetration, in violation of Section 289 or 264.1.
(Q) Aggravated sexual assault of a child, in violation of Section 269.
(2) Any person previously convicted of a felony specified in
subparagraphs (A) to (L), inclusive, of paragraph (1), or assault with intent to
commit murder under former Section 217, who is convicted of a subsequent
felony and who was personally armed with a firearm at any time during
its commission or attempted commission or was unlawfully armed with a
firearm at the time of his or her arrest for the subsequent felony.
(3) Aggravated arson, in violation of Section 451.5.
(b)(l) The existence of any fact which that would make a person
ineligible for probation under subdivision (a) shall be alleged in the
accusatory pleading, and either admitted by the defendant in open court,
or found to be true by the jury trying the issue of guilt, by the court where
guilt is established by plea of guilty or nolo contendere, or by trial by the
court sitting without a jury trier of fact.
(2) This subdivision does not prohibit the adjournment of criminal
proceedings pursuant to Division 6 (commencing with Section 6000) of
the Welfare and Institutions Code.
(3) As used in subdivision (a), “used a fi rearm” means to display a
fi rearm in a menacing manner, to intentionally fi re it, or to intentionally
strike or hit a human being with it, or to use it in any manner that qualifies
under Section 12022.5.
(4) (3) As used in subdivision (a), “armed with a fi rearm” means to
knowingly carry or have available for use a fi rearm as a means of offense
or defense.
SEC. 15. Section 1203.065 of the Penal Code is amended to read:
1203.065. (a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, probation
shall not be granted to, nor shall the execution or imposition of sentence
be suspended for, any person who is convicted of violating paragraph
(2) or (6) of subdivision (a) of Section 261, Section 264.1, 266h, 266i, or
266j, or 269, paragraph (2) or (3) of subdivision (c), or subdivision (d), of
Section 286, paragraph (2) or (3) of subdivision (c), or subdivision (d), of
Section 288a, subdivision (a) of Section 289, of committing sodomy or oral
copulation in violation of Section 286 or 288a by force, violence, duress,
menace, or fear of immediate and unlawful bodily injury on the victim or
another person, or of violating subdivision (c) of Section 311.4.
(b)(1) Except in unusual cases where the interests of justice would
best be served if the person is granted probation, probation shall not
be granted to any person who is convicted of a violation of violating
paragraph (7) of subdivision (a) of Section 261, subdivision (k) of Section
286, subdivision (k) of Section 288a, subdivision (g) of Section 289, or
Section 220 for assault with intent to commit any of the following: rape,
sodomy, oral copulation, or any violation of Section 264.1, subdivision (b)
of Section 288, or Section 289 a specified sexual offense.
(2) When probation is granted, the court shall specify on the record
and shall enter on the minutes the circumstances indicating that the
interests of justice would best be served by the disposition.
SEC. 16. Section 1203.075 of the Penal Code is amended to read:
1203.075. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 1203:
(a) Probation Notwithstanding any other provision of law, probation
shall not be granted to, nor shall the execution or imposition of sentence
be suspended for, nor shall a fi nding bringing the defendant within this
section be stricken pursuant to Section 1385 for, any person who, with
the intent to inflict the injury, personally inflicts great bodily injury, as
defined in Section 12022.7, on the person of another in the commission or
attempted commission of any of the following crimes:
(1) Murder.
(2) Robbery, in violation of Section 211.
(3) Kidnapping, in violation of Section 207, 209, or 209.5.
(4) Kidnapping, in violation of Section 209 Lewd or lascivious act,
in violation of Section 288.

(PROPOSITION 83 CONTINUED)

(5) Burglary of the fi rst degree, as defi ned in Section 460.
(6) Rape, in violation of paragraph (2) or (6) of subdivision (a) of
Section 261 or paragraph (1) or (4) of subdivision (a) of Section 261, 262,
or 264.1.
(7) Assault with intent to commit rape or sodomy a specified sexual
offense, in violation of Section 220.
(8) Escape, in violation of Section 4530 or 4532.
(9) A Sexual penetration, in violation of subdivision (a) of Section
289 or 264.1.
(10) Sodomy, in violation of Section 286.
(11) Oral copulation, in violation of Section 288a.
(12) Carjacking, in violation of Section 215.
(13) Kidnapping, in violation of Section 209.5 Continuous sexual
abuse of a child, in violation of Section 288.5.
(14) Aggravated sexual assault of a child, in violation of Section 269.
(b)(1) The existence of any fact which that would make a person
ineligible for probation under subdivision (a) shall be alleged in the
accusatory pleading, and either admitted by the defendant in open court,
or found to be true by the jury trying the issue of guilt or by the court where
guilt is established by a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or by a trial by the
court sitting without a jury trier of fact.
(2) This subdivision does not prohibit the adjournment of criminal
proceedings pursuant to Division 3 (commencing with Section 3000) or Division
6 (commencing with Section 6000) of the Welfare and Institutions Code.
(3) As used in subdivision (a), “great bodily injury” means “great
bodily injury” as defi ned in Section 12022.7.
SEC. 17. Section 3000 of the Penal Code is amended to read:
3000. (a)(l) The Legislature fi nds and declares that the period
immediately following incarceration is critical to successful reintegration
of the offender into society and to positive citizenship. It is in the interest of
public safety for the state to provide for the supervision of and surveillance
of parolees, including the judicious use of revocation actions, and to
provide educational, vocational, family and personal counseling necessary
to assist parolees in the transition between imprisonment and discharge. A
sentence pursuant to Section 1168 or 1170 shall include a period of parole,
unless waived, as provided in this section.
(2) The Legislature fi nds and declares that it is not the intent of this
section to diminish resources allocated to the Department of Corrections
for parole functions for which the department is responsible. It is also not
the intent of this section to diminish the resources allocated to the Board
of Prison Terms to execute its duties with respect to parole functions for
which the board is responsible.
(3) The Legislature fi nds and declares that diligent effort must
be made to ensure that parolees are held accountable for their criminal
behavior, including, but not limited to, the satisfaction of restitution fi nes
and orders.
(4) Any fi nding made pursuant to Article 4 (commencing with
Section 6600) of Chapter 2 of Part 2 of Division 6 of the Welfare and
Institutions Code, that a person is The parole period of any person found to
be a sexually violent predator shall not toll, discharge, or otherwise affect
that person’s be tolled until that person is found to no longer be a sexually
violent predator, at which time the period of parole, or any remaining
portion thereof, shall begin to run.
(b) Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in Article 3
(commencing with Section 3040) of this chapter, the following shall apply:
(1) At the expiration of a term of imprisonment of one year and
one day, or a term of imprisonment imposed pursuant to Section 1170 or
at the expiration of a term reduced pursuant to Section 2931 or 2933, if
applicable, the inmate shall be released on parole for a period not exceeding
three years, except that any inmate sentenced for an offense specified in
paragraph (3), (4), (5), (6), (11), (16), or (18) of subdivision (c) of Section
667.5 shall be released on parole for a period not exceeding five years,
unless in either case the parole authority for good cause waives parole and
discharges the inmate from the custody of the department.
(2) In the case of any inmate sentenced under Section 1168, the period
of parole shall not exceed five years in the case of an inmate imprisoned for
any offense other than fi rst or second degree murder for which the inmate
has received a life sentence, and shall not exceed three years in the case of
any other inmate, unless in either case the parole authority for good cause

text of proposed laws
waives parole and discharges the inmate from custody of the department.
This subdivision shall also be applicable to inmates who committed crimes
prior to July 1, 1977, to the extent specified in Section 1170.2.
(3) Notwithstanding paragraphs (1) and (2), in the case of any offense
for which the inmate has received a life sentence pursuant to Section 667.61
or 667.71, the period of parole shall be five 10 years. Upon the request of the
Department of Corrections, and on the grounds that the paroled inmate may
pose a substantial danger to public safety, the Board of Prison Terms shall
conduct a hearing to determine if the parolee shall be subject to a single
additional five-year period of parole. The board shall conduct the hearing
pursuant to the procedures and standards governing parole revocation. The
request for parole extension shall be made no less than 180 days prior to the
expiration of the initial five-year period of parole.
(4) The parole authority shall consider the request of any inmate
regarding the length of his or her parole and the conditions thereof.
(5) Upon successful completion of parole, or at the end of the
maximum statutory period of parole specified for the inmate under
paragraph (1), (2), or (3), as the case may be, whichever is earlier, the
inmate shall be discharged from custody. The date of the maximum
statutory period of parole under this subdivision and paragraphs (1), (2),
and (3) shall be computed from the date of initial parole or from the date
of extension of parole pursuant to paragraph (3) and shall be a period
chronologically determined. Time during which parole is suspended
because the prisoner has absconded or has been returned to custody as a
parole violator shall not be credited toward any period of parole unless the
prisoner is found not guilty of the parole violation. However, in no case,
except the period of parole is subject to the following:
(A) Except as provided in Section 3064, in no case may a prisoner
subject to three years on parole be retained under parole supervision or in
custody for a period longer than four years from the date of his or her initial
parole, and, except parole.
(B) Except as provided in Section 3064, in no case may a prisoner
subject to five years on parole be retained under parole supervision or in
custody for a period longer than seven years from the date of his or her initial
parole or from the date of extension of parole pursuant to paragraph (3).
(C) Except as provided in Section 3064, in no case may a prisoner subject
to 10 years on parole be retained under parole supervision or in custody for a
period longer than 15 years from the date of his or her initial parole.
(6) The Department of Corrections shall meet with each inmate at
least 30 days prior to his or her good time release date and shall provide,
under guidelines specified by the parole authority, the conditions of parole
and the length of parole up to the maximum period of time provided by
law. The inmate has the right to reconsideration of the length of parole and
conditions thereof by the parole authority. The Department of Corrections
or the Board of Prison Terms may impose as a condition of parole that a
prisoner make payments on the prisoner’s outstanding restitution fi nes or
orders imposed pursuant to subdivision (a) or (c) of Section 13967 of the
Government Code, as operative prior to September 28, 1994, or subdivision
(b) or (f) of Section 1202.4.
(7) For purposes of this chapter, the Board of Prison Terms shall be
considered the parole authority.
(8) The sole authority to issue warrants for the return to actual
custody of any state prisoner released on parole rests with the Board of
Prison Terms, except for any escaped state prisoner or any state prisoner
released prior to his or her scheduled release date who should be returned
to custody, and Section 3060 shall apply.
(9) It is the intent of the Legislature that efforts be made with
respect to persons who are subject to subparagraph (C) of paragraph (1)
of subdivision (a) of Section 290 who are on parole to engage them in
treatment.
SEC. 18. Section 3000.07 is added to the Penal Code, to read:
3000.07. (a) Every inmate who has been convicted for any felony
violation of a “registerable sex offense” described in subparagraph (A) of
paragraph (2) of subdivision (a) of Section 290 or any attempt to commit
any of the above-mentioned offenses and who is committed to prison and
released on parole pursuant to Section 3000 or 3000.1 shall be monitored
by a global positioning system for the term of his or her parole, or for the
duration or any remaining part thereof, whichever period of time is less.
(b) Any inmate released on parole pursuant to this section shall
be required to pay for the costs associated with the monitoring by a global
positioning system. However, the Department of Corrections shall waive any

Text of Proposed Laws | 133

83

text of proposed laws

83

or all of that payment upon a finding of an inability to pay. The department
shall consider any remaining amounts the inmate has been ordered to pay
in fines, assessments and restitution fines, fees, and orders, and shall give
priority to the payment of those items before requiring that the inmate pay
for the global positioning monitoring. No inmate shall be denied parole on
the basis of his or her inability to pay for those monitoring costs.
SEC. 19. Section 3001 of the Penal Code is amended to read:
3001. (a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, when any
person referred to in paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of Section 3000 who
was not imprisoned for committing a violent felony, as defined in subdivision
(c) of Section 667.5, has been released on parole from the state prison, and
has been on parole continuously for one year since release from confinement,
within 30 days, that person shall be discharged from parole, unless the
Department of Corrections recommends to the Board of Prison Terms that the
person be retained on parole and the board, for good cause, determines that
the person will be retained. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, when
any person referred to in paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of Section 3000 who
was imprisoned for committing a violent felony, as defined in subdivision
(c) of Section 667.5, has been released on parole from the state prison for a
period not exceeding three years and has been on parole continuously for two
years since release from confinement, or has been released on parole from
the state prison for a period not exceeding five years and has been on parole
continuously for three years since release from confinement, the department
shall discharge, within 30 days, that person from parole, unless the department
recommends to the board that the person be retained on parole and the board,
for good cause, determines that the person will be retained. The board shall
make a written record of its determination and the department shall transmit
a copy thereof to the parolee.
(b) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, when any person
referred to in paragraph (2) or (3) of subdivision (b) of Section 3000 has been
released on parole from the state prison, and has been on parole continuously
for three years since release from confinement or since extension of parole,
the board shall discharge, within 30 days, the person from parole, unless
the board, for good cause, determines that the person will be retained on
parole. The board shall make a written record of its determination and the
department shall transmit a copy thereof to the parolee.
(c) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, when any person
referred to in paragraph (3) of subdivision (b) of Section 3000 has
been released on parole from the state prison, and has been on parole
continuously for six years since release from confinement, the board shall
discharge, within 30 days, the person from parole, unless the board, for
good cause, determines that the person will be retained on parole. The
board shall make a written record of its determination and the department
shall transmit a copy thereof to the parolee.
(d) In the event of a retention on parole, the parolee shall be entitled
to a review by the parole authority each year thereafter until the maximum
statutory period of parole has expired.
(d) (e) The amendments to this section made during the 1987–88
Regular Session of the Legislature shall only be applied prospectively
and shall not extend the parole period for any person whose eligibility
for discharge from parole was fi xed as of the effective date of those
amendments.
SEC. 20. Section 3003 of the Penal Code is amended to read:
3003. (a) Except as otherwise provided in this section, an inmate
who is released on parole shall be returned to the county that was the last
legal residence of the inmate prior to his or her incarceration.
For purposes of this subdivision, “last legal residence” shall not be
construed to mean the county wherein the inmate committed an offense
while confi ned in a state prison or local jail facility or while confi ned for
treatment in a state hospital.
(b) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), an inmate may be returned
to another county if that would be in the best interests of the public. If
the Board of Prison Terms setting the conditions of parole for inmates
sentenced pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 1168, as determined by
the parole consideration panel, or the Department of Corrections setting
the conditions of parole for inmates sentenced pursuant to Section 1170,
decides on a return to another county, it shall place its reasons in writing
in the parolee’s permanent record and include these reasons in the notice
to the sheriff or chief of police pursuant to Section 3058.6. In making its
decision, the paroling authority shall consider, among others, the following

134 | Text of Proposed Laws

factors, giving the greatest weight to the protection of the victim and the
safety of the community:
(1) The need to protect the life or safety of a victim, the parolee, a
witness, or any other person.
(2) Public concern that would reduce the chance that the inmate’s
parole would be successfully completed.
(3) The verified existence of a work offer, or an educational or
vocational training program.
(4) The existence of family in another county with whom the inmate
has maintained strong ties and whose support would increase the chance
that the inmate’s parole would be successfully completed.
(5) The lack of necessary outpatient treatment programs for parolees
receiving treatment pursuant to Section 2960.
(c) The Department of Corrections, in determining an out-of-county
commitment, shall give priority to the safety of the community and any
witnesses and victims.
(d) In making its decision about an inmate who participated in a
joint venture program pursuant to Article 1.5 (commencing with Section
2717.1) of Chapter 5, the paroling authority shall give serious consideration
to releasing him or her to the county where the joint venture program
employer is located if that employer states to the paroling authority that he
or she intends to employ the inmate upon release.
(e)(l) The following information, if available, shall be released by the
Department of Corrections to local law enforcement agencies regarding a
paroled inmate who is released in their jurisdictions:
(A) Last, fi rst, and middle name.
(B) Birth date.
(C) Sex, race, height, weight, and hair and eye color.
(D) Date of parole and discharge.
(E) Registration status, if the inmate is required to register as a result
of a controlled substance, sex, or arson offense.
(F) California Criminal Information Number, FBI number, social
security number, and driver’s license number.
(G) County of commitment.
(H) A description of scars, marks, and tattoos on the inmate.
(I) Offense or offenses for which the inmate was convicted that
resulted in parole in this instance.
(J) Address, including all of the following information:
(i) Street name and number. Post office box numbers are not
acceptable for purposes of this subparagraph.
(ii) City and ZIP Code.
(iii) Date that the address provided pursuant to this subparagraph
was proposed to be effective.
(K) Contact officer and unit, including all of the following
information:
(i) Name and telephone number of each contact officer.
(ii) Contact unit type of each contact officer such as units responsible
for parole, registration, or county probation.
(L) A digitized image of the photograph and at least a single digit
fi ngerprint of the parolee.
(M) A geographic coordinate for the parolee’s residence location
for use with a Geographical Information System (GIS) or comparable
computer program.
(2) The information required by this subdivision shall come from the
statewide parolee database. The information obtained from each source
shall be based on the same timeframe.
(3) All of the information required by this subdivision shall be
provided utilizing a computer-to-computer transfer in a format usable
by a desktop computer system. The transfer of this information shall be
continually available to local law enforcement agencies upon request.
(4) The unauthorized release or receipt of the information described
in this subdivision is a violation of Section 11143.
(f) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an inmate who is
released on parole shall not be returned to a location within 35 miles of the
actual residence of a victim of, or a witness to, a violent felony as defi ned
in paragraphs (1) to (7), inclusive, of subdivision (c) of Section 667.5 or a

(PROPOSITION 83 CONTINUED)

felony in which the defendant inflicts great bodily injury on any person other
than an accomplice that has been charged and proved as provided for in
Section 12022.53, 12022.7, or 12022.9, if the victim or witness has requested
additional distance in the placement of the inmate on parole, and if the Board
of Prison Terms or the Department of Corrections finds that there is a need
to protect the life, safety, or well-being of a victim or witness.
(g)(1) Notwithstanding any other law, an inmate who is released
on parole for any violation of Section 288 or 288.5 shall not be placed or
reside, for the duration of his or her period of parole, within one quarter
mile of any public or private school, including any or all of kindergarten
and grades 1 to 8, inclusive.
Notwithstanding any other law, an inmate who is released on parole
for a violation of Section 288 or 288.5 whom the Department of Corrections
and Rehabilitation determines poses a high risk to the public shall not be
placed or reside, for the duration of his or her parole, within one-half mile
of any public or private school including any or all of kindergarten and
grades 1 to 12, inclusive.
(h) Notwithstanding any other law, an inmate who is released on
parole for an offense involving stalking shall not be returned to a location
within 35 miles of the victim’s actual residence or place of employment if
the victim or witness has requested additional distance in the placement of
the inmate on parole, and if the Board of Prison Terms or the Department
of Corrections fi nds that there is a need to protect the life, safety, or wellbeing of the victim.
(i) (h) The authority shall give consideration to the equitable
distribution of parolees and the proportion of out-of-county commitments
from a county compared to the number of commitments from that county
when making parole decisions.
(j) (i) An inmate may be paroled to another state pursuant to any
other law.
(k) (j)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), the Department of
Corrections shall be the agency primarily responsible for, and shall have
control over, the program, resources, and staff implementing the Law
Enforcement Automated Data System (LEADS) in conformance with
subdivision (e).
(2) Notwithstanding paragraph (1), the Department of Justice shall
be the agency primarily responsible for the proper release of information
under LEADS that relates to fi ngerprint cards.
SEC. 21. Section 3003.5 of the Penal Code is amended to read:
3003.5. (a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, when a
person is released on parole after having served a term of imprisonment
in state prison for any offense for which registration is required pursuant
to Section 290, that person may not, during the period of parole, reside in
any single family dwelling with any other person also required to register
pursuant to Section 290, unless those persons are legally related by blood,
marriage, or adoption. For purposes of this section, “single family dwelling”
shall not include a residential facility which serves six or fewer persons.
(b) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, it is unlawful for any
person for whom registration is required pursuant to Section 290 to reside
within 2000 feet of any public or private school, or park where children
regularly gather.
(c) Nothing in this section shall prohibit municipal jurisdictions
from enacting local ordinances that further restrict the residency of any
person for whom registration is required pursuant to Section 290.
SEC. 22. Section 3004 of the Penal Code is amended to read:
3004. (a) Notwithstanding any other law, the parole authority may
require, as a condition of release on parole or reinstatement on parole, or
as an intermediate sanction in lieu of return to prison, that an inmate or
parolee agree in writing to the use of electronic monitoring or supervising
devices for the purpose of helping to verify his or her compliance with all
other conditions of parole. The devices shall not be used to eavesdrop or
record any conversation, except a conversation between the parolee and the
agent supervising the parolee which is to be used solely for the purposes
of voice identification.
(b) Every inmate who has been convicted for any felony violation of
a “registerable sex offense” described in subparagraph (A) of paragraph
(2) of subdivision (a) of Section 290 or any attempt to commit any of the
above-mentioned offenses and who is committed to prison and released on
parole pursuant to Section 3000 or 3000.1 shall be monitored by a global
positioning system for life.

text of proposed laws
(c) Any inmate released on parole pursuant to this section shall be
required to pay for the costs associated with the monitoring by a global
positioning system. However, the Department of Corrections shall waive
any or all of that payment upon a finding of an inability to pay. The
department shall consider any remaining amounts the inmate has been
ordered to pay in fines, assessments and restitution fines, fees, and orders,
and shall give priority to the payment of those items before requiring that
the inmate pay for the global positioning monitoring.
SEC. 23. Section 12022.75 of the Penal Code is amended to read:
12022.75. Any (a) Except as provided in subdivision (b), any person
who, for the purpose of committing a felony, administers by injection,
inhalation, ingestion, or any other means, any controlled substance listed
in Section 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058 of the Health and Safety
Code, against the victim’s will by means of force, violence, or fear of
immediate and unlawful bodily injury to the victim or another person,
shall, in addition and consecutive to the penalty provided for the felony or
attempted felony of which he or she has been convicted, be punished by an
additional term of three years.
(b)(1) Any person who, in the commission or attempted commission
of any offense specified in paragraph (2), administers any controlled
substance listed in Section 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058 of the
Health and Safety Code to the victim shall be punished by an additional
and consecutive term of imprisonment in the state prison for five years.
(2) This subdivision shall apply to the following offenses:
(A) Rape, in violation of paragraph (3) or (4) of subdivision (a) of
Section 261.
(B) Sodomy, in violation of subdivision (f) or (i) of Section 286.
(C) Oral copulation, in violation of subdivision (f) or (i) of Section
288a.
(D) Sexual penetration, in violation of subdivision (d) or (e) of
Section 289.
(E) Any offense specified in subdivision (c) of Section 667.61.
SEC. 24. Section 6600 of the Welfare and Institutions Code is
amended to read:
6600. As used in this article, the following terms have the following
meanings:
(a)(1) “Sexually violent predator” means a person who has been
convicted of a sexually violent offense against two one or more victims
and who has a diagnosed mental disorder that makes the person a danger to
the health and safety of others in that it is likely that he or she will engage
in sexually violent criminal behavior.
(2) For purposes of this subdivision any of the following shall be
considered a conviction for a sexually violent offense:
(A) A prior or current conviction that resulted in a determinate
prison sentence for an offense described in subdivision (b).
(B) A conviction for an offense described in subdivision (b) that
was committed prior to July 1, 1977, and that resulted in an indeterminate
prison sentence.
(C) A prior conviction in another jurisdiction for an offense that
includes all of the elements of an offense described in subdivision (b).
(D) A conviction for an offense under a predecessor statute that
includes all of the elements of an offense described in subdivision (b).
(E) A prior conviction for which the inmate received a grant of
probation for an offense described in subdivision (b).
(F) A prior fi nding of not guilty by reason of insanity for an offense
described in subdivision (b).
(G) A conviction resulting in a fi nding that the person was a mentally
disordered sex offender.
(H) A prior conviction for an offense described in subdivision (b) for
which the person was committed to the Department of the Youth Authority
pursuant to Section 1731.5.
(I) A prior conviction for an offense described in subdivision (b) that
resulted in an indeterminate prison sentence.
(3) Conviction of one or more of the crimes enumerated in this section
shall constitute evidence that may support a court or jury determination
that a person is a sexually violent predator, but shall not be the sole basis
for the determination. The existence of any prior convictions may be shown
with documentary evidence. The details underlying the commission of an

Text of Proposed Laws | 135

83

text of proposed laws

83

offense that led to a prior conviction, including a predatory relationship
with the victim, may be shown by documentary evidence, including, but
not limited to, preliminary hearing transcripts, trial transcripts, probation
and sentencing reports, and evaluations by the State Department of Mental
Health. Jurors shall be admonished that they may not fi nd a person a
sexually violent predator based on prior offenses absent relevant evidence
of a currently diagnosed mental disorder that makes the person a danger to
the health and safety of others in that it is likely that he or she will engage
in sexually violent criminal behavior.
(4) The provisions of this section shall apply to any person against
whom proceedings were initiated for commitment as a sexually violent
predator on or after January 1, 1996.
(b) “Sexually violent offense” means the following acts when
committed by force, violence, duress, menace, or fear of immediate and
unlawful bodily injury on the victim or another person, or threatening
to retaliate in the future against the victim or any other person, and that
are committed on, before, or after the effective date of this article and
result in a conviction or a fi nding of not guilty by reason of insanity, as
provided defined in subdivision (a): a felony violation of paragraph (2) of
subdivision (a) of Section 261, paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) of Section
262, Section 264.1, 269, 286, subdivision (a) or (b) of Section 288, 288a,
288.5, or subdivision (a) of Section 289 of the Penal Code, or sodomy or
oral copulation in violation of Section 286 or 288a of the Penal Code any
felony violation of Section 207, 209, or 220 of the Penal Code, committed
with the intent to commit a violation of Section 261, 262, 264.1, 286, 288,
288a, or 289 of the Penal Code.
(c) “Diagnosed mental disorder” includes a congenital or acquired
condition affecting the emotional or volitional capacity that predisposes the
person to the commission of criminal sexual acts in a degree constituting
the person a menace to the health and safety of others.
(d) “Danger to the health and safety of others” does not require proof
of a recent overt act while the offender is in custody.
(e) “Predatory” means an act is directed toward a stranger, a person
of casual acquaintance with whom no substantial relationship exists, or an
individual with whom a relationship has been established or promoted for
the primary purpose of victimization.
(f) “Recent overt act” means any criminal act that manifests a
likelihood that the actor may engage in sexually violent predatory criminal
behavior.
(g) Notwithstanding any other provision of law and for purposes of
this section, no more than one a prior juvenile adjudication of a sexually
violent offense may constitute a prior conviction for which the person
received a determinate term if all of the following applies apply:
(1) The juvenile was 16 years of age or older at the time he or she
committed the prior offense.
(2) The prior offense is a sexually violent offense as specified in
subdivision (b). Notwithstanding Section 6600.1, only an offense described
in subdivision (b) shall constitute a sexually violent offense for purposes
of this subdivision.
(3) The juvenile was adjudged a ward of the juvenile court within the
meaning of Section 602 because of the person’s commission of the offense
giving rise to the juvenile court adjudication.
(4) The juvenile was committed to the Department of the Youth
Authority for the sexually violent offense.
(h) A minor adjudged a ward of the court for commission of an
offense that is defined as a sexually violent offense shall be entitled to
specific treatment as a sexual offender. The failure of a minor to receive that
treatment shall not constitute a defense or bar to a determination that any
person is a sexually violent predator within the meaning of this article.
SEC. 25. Section 6600.1 of the Welfare and Institutions Code is
amended to read:
6600.1. (a) If the victim of an underlying offense that is specified
in subdivision (b) of Section 6600 is a child under the age of 14 and the
offending act or acts involved substantial sexual conduct, the offense shall
constitute a “sexually violent offense” for purposes of Section 6600.
(b) “Substantial sexual conduct” means penetration of the vagina or
rectum of either the victim or the offender by the penis of the other or by
any foreign object, oral copulation, or masturbation of either the victim or
the offender.
SEC. 26. Section 6601 of the Welfare and Institutions Code is

136 | Text of Proposed Laws

amended to read:
6601. (a)(l) Whenever the Director of Corrections determines that
an individual who is in custody under the jurisdiction of the Department
of Corrections, and who is either serving a determinate prison sentence
or whose parole has been revoked, may be a sexually violent predator, the
director shall, at least six months prior to that individual’s scheduled date
for release from prison, refer the person for evaluation in accordance with
this section. However, if the inmate was received by the department with
less than nine months of his or her sentence to serve, or if the inmate’s
release date is modified by judicial or administrative action, the director
may refer the person for evaluation in accordance with this section at a date
that is less than six months prior to the inmate’s scheduled release date.
(2) A petition may be filed under this section if the individual
was in custody pursuant to his or her determinate prison term, parole
revocation term, or a hold placed pursuant to Section 6601.3, at the time
the petition is filed. A petition shall not be dismissed on the basis of a later
judicial or administrative determination that the individual’s custody was
unlawful, if the unlawful custody was the result of a good faith mistake
of fact or law. This paragraph shall apply to any petition filed on or after
January 1, 1996.
(b) The person shall be screened by the Department of Corrections
and the Board of Prison Terms based on whether the person has committed
a sexually violent predatory offense and on a review of the person’s social,
criminal, and institutional history. This screening shall be conducted
in accordance with a structured screening instrument developed and
updated by the State Department of Mental Health in consultation with the
Department of Corrections. If as a result of this screening it is determined
that the person is likely to be a sexually violent predator, the Department
of Corrections shall refer the person to the State Department of Mental
Health for a full evaluation of whether the person meets the criteria in
Section 6600.
(c) The State Department of Mental Health shall evaluate the person
in accordance with a standardized assessment protocol, developed and
updated by the State Department of Mental Health, to determine whether
the person is a sexually violent predator as defi ned in this article. The
standardized assessment protocol shall require assessment of diagnosable
mental disorders, as well as various factors known to be associated with the
risk of reoffense among sex offenders. Risk factors to be considered shall
include criminal and psychosexual history, type, degree, and duration of
sexual deviance, and severity of mental disorder.
(d) Pursuant to subdivision (c), the person shall be evaluated by two
practicing psychiatrists or psychologists, or one practicing psychiatrist and
one practicing psychologist, designated by the Director of Mental Health.
If both evaluators concur that the person has a diagnosed mental disorder
so that he or she is likely to engage in acts of sexual violence without
appropriate treatment and custody, the Director of Mental Health shall
forward a request for a petition for commitment under Section 6602 to the
county designated in subdivision (i). Copies of the evaluation reports and
any other supporting documents shall be made available to the attorney
designated by the county pursuant to subdivision (i) who may file a petition
for commitment.
(e) If one of the professionals performing the evaluation pursuant to
subdivision (d) does not concur that the person meets the criteria specified
in subdivision (d), but the other professional concludes that the person
meets those criteria, the Director of Mental Health shall arrange for further
examination of the person by two independent professionals selected in
accordance with subdivision (g).
(f) If an examination by independent professionals pursuant to
subdivision (e) is conducted, a petition to request commitment under this
article shall only be filed if both independent professionals who evaluate the
person pursuant to subdivision (e) concur that the person meets the criteria
for commitment specified in subdivision (d). The professionals selected
to evaluate the person pursuant to subdivision (g) shall inform the person
that the purpose of their examination is not treatment but to determine if
the person meets certain criteria to be involuntarily committed pursuant
to this article. It is not required that the person appreciate or understand
that information.
(g) Any independent professional who is designated by the Director
of Corrections or the Director of Mental Health for purposes of this section
shall not be a state government employee, shall have at least five years
of experience in the diagnosis and treatment of mental disorders, and

(PROPOSITION 83 CONTINUED)

shall include psychiatrists and licensed psychologists who have a doctoral
degree in psychology. The requirements set forth in this section also shall
apply to any professionals appointed by the court to evaluate the person for
purposes of any other proceedings under this article.
(h) If the State Department of Mental Health determines that the
person is a sexually violent predator as defi ned in this article, the Director
of Mental Health shall forward a request for a petition to be fi led for
commitment under this article to the county designated in subdivision (i).
Copies of the evaluation reports and any other supporting documents shall
be made available to the attorney designated by the county pursuant
to subdivision (i) who may fi le a petition for commitment in the
superior court.
(i) If the county’s designated counsel concurs with the
recommendation, a petition for commitment shall be filed in the superior
court of the county in which the person was convicted of the offense for
which he or she was committed to the jurisdiction of the Department
of Corrections. The petition shall be filed, and the proceedings shall be
handled, by either the district attorney or the county counsel of that county.
The county board of supervisors shall designate either the district attorney
or the county counsel to assume responsibility for proceedings under this
article.
(j) The time limits set forth in this section shall not apply during the
fi rst year that this article is operative.
(k) If the person is otherwise subject to parole, a fi nding or placement
made pursuant to this article shall not toll, discharge, or otherwise affect
the term of parole pursuant to Article 1 (commencing with Section 3000)
of Chapter 8 of Title 1 of Part 3 of the Penal Code.
(l) Pursuant to subdivision (d), the attorney designated by the county
pursuant to subdivision (i) shall notify the State Department of Mental
Health of its decision regarding the filing of a petition for commitment
within 15 days of making that decision.
SEC. 27. Section 6604 of the Welfare and Institutions Code is
amended to read:
6604. The court or jury shall determine whether, beyond a reasonable
doubt, the person is a sexually violent predator. If the court or jury is not
satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the person is a sexually violent
predator, the court shall direct that the person be released at the conclusion
of the term for which he or she was initially sentenced, or that the person
be unconditionally released at the end of parole, whichever is applicable. If
the court or jury determines that the person is a sexually violent predator,
the person shall be committed for two years an indeterminate term to
the custody of the State Department of Mental Health for appropriate
treatment and confi nement in a secure facility designated by the Director
of Mental Health, and the person shall not be kept in actual custody longer
than two years unless a subsequent extended commitment is obtained
from the court incident to the filing of a petition for extended commitment
under this article or unless the term of commitment changes pursuant to
subdivision (e) of Section 6605. Time spent on conditional release shall
not count toward the two-year term of commitment, unless the person is
placed in a locked facility by the conditional release program, in which
case the time in a locked facility shall count toward the two-year term of
commitment. The facility shall be located on the grounds of an institution
under the jurisdiction of the Department of Corrections.
SEC. 28. Section 6604.1 of the Welfare and Institutions Code is
amended to read:
6604.1. (a) The two-year indeterminate term of commitment
provided for in Section 6604 shall commence on the date upon which the
court issues the initial order of commitment pursuant to that section. The
initial two-year term shall not be reduced by any time spent in a secure
facility prior to the order of commitment. For any subsequent extended
commitments, the term of commitment shall be for two years commencing
from the date of the termination of the previous commitment.
(b) The person shall be evaluated by two practicing psychologists
or psychiatrists, or by one practicing psychologist and one practicing
psychiatrist, designated by the State Department of Mental Health. The
provisions of subdivisions (c) to (i), inclusive, of Section 6601 shall apply
to evaluations performed for purposes of extended commitments. The
rights, requirements, and procedures set forth in Section 6603 shall apply
to extended all commitment proceedings.
SEC. 29. Section 6605 of the Welfare and Institutions Code is

text of proposed laws
amended to read:
6605. (a) A person found to be a sexually violent predator and
committed to the custody of the State Department of Mental Health shall
have a current examination of his or her mental condition made at least
once every year. The annual report shall include consideration of whether
the committed person currently meets the definition of a sexually violent
predator and whether conditional release to a less restrictive alternative
or an unconditional release is in the best interest of the person and
conditions can be imposed that would adequately protect the community.
The Department of Mental Health shall file this periodic report with the
court that committed the person under this article. The report shall be
in the form of a declaration and shall be prepared by a professionally
qualified person. A copy of the report shall be served on the prosecuting
agency involved in the initial commitment and upon the committed person.
The person may retain, or if he or she is indigent and so requests, the court
may appoint, a qualified expert or professional person to examine him or
her, and the expert or professional person shall have access to all records
concerning the person.
(b) The director shall provide the committed person with an annual
written notice of his or her right to petition the court for conditional
release under Section 6608. The notice shall contain a waiver of rights.
The director shall forward the notice and waiver form to the court with
the annual report. If the person does not affi rmatively waive his or her
right to petition the court for conditional release, the court shall set a show
cause hearing to determine whether facts exist that warrant a hearing on
whether the person’s condition has so changed that he or she would not be
a danger to the health and safety of others if discharged. The committed
person shall have the right to be present and to have an attorney represent
him or her at the show cause hearing. If the Department of Mental Health
determines that either: (1) the person’s condition has so changed that the
person no longer meets the definition of a sexually violent predator, or (2)
conditional release to a less restrictive alternative is in the best interest
of the person and conditions can be imposed that adequately protect the
community, the director shall authorize the person to petition the court for
conditional release to a less restrictive alternative or for an unconditional
discharge. The petition shall be filed with the court and served upon the
prosecuting agency responsible for the initial commitment. The court,
upon receipt of the petition for conditional release to a less restrictive
alternative or unconditional discharge, shall order a show cause hearing
at which the court can consider the petition and any accompanying
documentation provided by the medical director, the prosecuting attorney
or the committed person.
(c) If the court at the show cause hearing determines that probable
cause exists to believe that the committed person’s diagnosed mental
disorder has so changed that he or she is not a danger to the health and
safety of others and is not likely to engage in sexually violent criminal
behavior if discharged, then the court shall set a hearing on the issue.
(d) At the hearing, the committed person shall have the right to be
present and shall be entitled to the benefit of all constitutional protections
that were afforded to him or her at the initial commitment proceeding. The
attorney designated by the county pursuant to subdivision (i) of Section
6601 shall represent the state and shall have the right to demand a jury trial
and to have the committed person evaluated by experts chosen by the state.
The committed person also shall have the right to demand a jury trial and
to have experts evaluate him or her on his or her behalf. The court shall
appoint an expert if the person is indigent and requests an appointment.
The burden of proof at the hearing shall be on the state to prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that the committed person’s diagnosed mental disorder
remains such that he or she is a danger to the health and safety of others and
is likely to engage in sexually violent criminal behavior if discharged.
(e) If the court or jury rules against the committed person at the
hearing conducted pursuant to subdivision (d), the term of commitment
of the person shall run for a an indeterminate period of two years from the
date of this ruling. If the court or jury rules for the committed person, he or
she shall be unconditionally released and unconditionally discharged.
(f) In the event that the State Department of Mental Health has reason
to believe that a person committed to it as a sexually violent predator is
no longer a sexually violent predator, it shall seek judicial review of the
person’s commitment pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 7250
in the superior court from which the commitment was made. If the superior
court determines that the person is no longer a sexually violent predator, he

Text of Proposed Laws | 137

83

text of proposed laws

83
84

or she shall be unconditionally released and unconditionally discharged.
SEC. 30. Section 6608 of the Welfare and Institutions Code is
amended to read:
6608. (a) Nothing in this article shall prohibit the person who
has been committed as a sexually violent predator from petitioning the
court for conditional release and subsequent or an unconditional discharge
without the recommendation or concurrence of the Director of Mental
Health. If a person has previously filed a petition for conditional release
without the concurrence of the director and the court determined, either
upon review of the petition or following a hearing, that the petition was
frivolous or that the committed person’s condition had not so changed that
he or she would not be a danger to others in that it is not likely that he
or she will engage in sexually violent criminal behavior if placed under
supervision and treatment in the community, then the court shall deny
the subsequent petition unless it contains facts upon which a court could
fi nd that the condition of the committed person had so changed that a
hearing was warranted. Upon receipt of a fi rst or subsequent petition from
a committed person without the concurrence of the director, the court shall
endeavor whenever possible to review the petition and determine if it is
based upon frivolous grounds and, if so, shall deny the petition without a
hearing. The person petitioning for conditional release and unconditional
discharge under this subdivision shall be entitled to assistance of counsel.
(b) The court shall give notice of the hearing date to the attorney
designated in subdivision (i) of Section 6601, the retained or appointed
attorney for the committed person, and the Director of Mental Health at
least 15 court days before the hearing date.
(c) No hearing upon the petition shall be held until the person who
is committed has been under commitment for confi nement and care in a
facility designated by the Director of Mental Health for not less than one
year from the date of the order of commitment.
(d) The court shall hold a hearing to determine whether the person
committed would be a danger to the health and safety of others in that it
is likely that he or she will engage in sexually violent criminal behavior
due to his or her diagnosed mental disorder if under supervision and
treatment in the community. If the court at the hearing determines that
the committed person would not be a danger to others due to his or her
diagnosed mental disorder while under supervision and treatment in the
community, the court shall order the committed person placed with an
appropriate forensic conditional release program operated by the state for
one year. A substantial portion of the state-operated forensic conditional
release program shall include outpatient supervision and treatment. The
court shall retain jurisdiction of the person throughout the course of the
program. At the end of one year, the court shall hold a hearing to determine
if the person should be unconditionally released from commitment on the
basis that, by reason of a diagnosed mental disorder, he or she is not a
danger to the health and safety of others in that it is not likely that he or she
will engage in sexually violent criminal behavior. The court shall not make
this determination until the person has completed at least one year in the
state-operated forensic conditional release program. The court shall notify
the Director of Mental Health of the hearing date.
(e) Before placing a committed person in a state-operated forensic
conditional release program, the community program director designated
by the State Department of Mental Health shall submit a written
recommendation to the court stating which forensic conditional release
program is most appropriate for supervising and treating the committed
person. If the court does not accept the community program director’s
recommendation, the court shall specify the reason or reasons for its
order on the record. The procedures described in Sections 1605 to 1610,
inclusive, of the Penal Code shall apply to the person placed in the forensic
conditional release program.
(f) If the court determines that the person should be transferred to
a state-operated forensic conditional release program, the community
program director, or his or her designee, shall make the necessary
placement arrangements and, within 21 days after receiving notice of the
court’s fi nding, the person shall be placed in the community in accordance
with the treatment and supervision plan unless good cause for not doing so
is presented to the court.
(g) If the court rules against the committed person at the trial for
unconditional release from commitment, the court may place the committed
person on outpatient status in accordance with the procedures described in
Title 15 (commencing with Section 1600) of Part 2 of the Penal Code.

138 | Text of Proposed Laws

(h) If the court denies the petition to place the person in an appropriate
forensic conditional release program or if the petition for unconditional
discharge is denied, the person may not file a new application until one
year has elapsed from the date of the denial.
(i) In any hearing authorized by this section, the petitioner shall have
the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence.
(j) If the petition for conditional release is not made by the director
of the treatment facility to which the person is committed, no action on
the petition shall be taken by the court without fi rst obtaining the written
recommendation of the director of the treatment facility.
(k) Time spent in a conditional release program pursuant to this
section shall not count toward the term of commitment under this article
unless the person is confi ned in a locked facility by the conditional release
program, in which case the time spent in a locked facility shall count
toward the term of commitment.
SEC. 31. Intent Clause
It is the intent of the People of the State of California in enacting this
measure to strengthen and improve the laws that punish and control sexual
offenders. It is also the intent of the People of the State of California that
if any provision in this act conflicts with any other provision of law that
provides for a greater penalty or longer period of imprisonment the latter
provision shall apply.
SEC. 32. Severability Clause
If any provision of this act, or part thereof, is for any reason held to be
invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining provisions shall not be affected,
but shall remain in full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of
this act are severable.
SEC. 33. Amendment Clause
The provisions of this act shall not be amended by the Legislature
except by a statute passed in each house by rollcall vote entered in the
journal, two-thirds of the membership of each house concurring, or by a
statute that becomes effective only when approved by the voters. However,
the Legislature may amend the provisions of this act to expand the scope
of their application or to increase the punishments or penalties provided
herein by a statute passed by majority vote of each house thereof.

PROPOSITION 84
This initiative measure is submitted to the people in accordance with
the provisions of Article II, Section 8, of the California Constitution.
This initiative measure adds sections to the Public Resources Code;
therefore, new provisions proposed to be added are printed in italic type to
indicate that they are new.
PROPOSED LAW
SECTION 1.
to read:

Division 43 is added to the Public Resources Code,

DIVISION 43. THE SAFE DRINKING WATER, WATER QUALITY
AND SUPPLY, FLOOD CONTROL, RIVER AND COASTAL
PROTECTION BOND ACT OF 2006

CHAPTER 1.

GENERAL PROVISIONS

75001. This Division shall be known and may be cited as the Safe
Drinking Water, Water Quality and Supply, Flood Control, River and
Coastal Protection Bond Act of 2006.
75002. The people of California find and declare that protecting the
state’s drinking water and water resources is vital to the public health, the
state’s economy, and the environment.
75002.5. The people of California further find and declare that the
state’s waters are vulnerable to contamination by dangerous bacteria,
polluted runoff, toxic chemicals, damage from catastrophic floods and
the demands of a growing population. Therefore, actions must be taken to
ensure safe drinking water and a reliable supply of water for farms, cities
and businesses, as well as to protect California’s rivers, lakes, streams,
beaches, bays and coastal waters, for this and future generations.
75003. The people of California further find and declare that it is

(PROPOSITION 84 CONTINUED)

necessary and in the public interest to do all of the following:
(a) Ensure that safe drinking water is available to all Californians by:
(1) Providing for emergency assistance to communities with
contaminated sources of drinking water.
(2) Assisting small communities in making the improvements needed
in their water systems to clean up and protect their drinking water from
contamination.
(3) Providing grants and loans for safe drinking water and water
pollution prevention projects.
(4) Protecting the water quality of the Sacramento-San Joaquin
Delta, a key source of drinking water for 23 million Californians.
(5) Assisting each region of the state in improving local water supply
reliability and water quality.
(6) Resolving water-related conflicts, improving local and regional
water self-sufficiency and reducing reliance on imported water.
(b) Protect the public from catastrophic floods by identifying and
mapping the areas most at risk, inspecting and repairing levees and flood
control facilities, and reducing the long-term costs of flood management,
reducing future flood risk and maximizing public benefits by planning,
designing and implementing multi-objective flood corridor projects.
(c) Protect the rivers, lakes and streams of the state from pollution,
loss of water quality, and destruction of fish and wildlife habitat.
(d) Protect the beaches, bays and coastal waters of the state for
future generations.
(e) Revitalizing our communities and making them more sustainable
and livable by investing in sound land use planning, local parks and urban
greening.
75003.5. The people of California further find and declare that the
growth in population of the state and the impacts of climate change pose
significant challenges. These challenges must be addressed through careful
planning and through improvements in land use and water management that
both reduce contributions to global warming and improve the adaptability
of our water and flood control systems. Improvements include better
integration of water supply, water quality, flood control and ecosystem
protection, as well greater water use efficiency and conservation to reduce
energy consumption.
75004. It is the intent of the people that investment of public funds
pursuant to this division should result in public benefits.
75005. As used in this division, the following terms have the
following meanings:
(a) “Acquisition” means the acquisition of a fee interest or any other
interest in real property including easements, leases and development
rights.
(b) “Board” means the Wildlife Conservation Board.
(c) “California Water Plan” means the California Water Plan
Update Bulletin 160-05 and subsequent revisions and amendments.
(d) “Delta” means the Sacramento-San Joaquin River Delta.
(e) “Department” means the Department of Water Resources.
(f) “Development” includes, but is not limited to the physical
improvement of real property including the construction of facilities or
structures.
(g) “Disadvantaged community” means a community with a median
household income less than 80% of the statewide average. “Severely
disadvantaged community” means a community with a median household
income less than 60% of the statewide average.
(h) “Fund” means the Safe Drinking Water, Water Quality and
Supply, Flood Control, River and Coastal Protection Fund of 2006.
(i) “Interpretation” includes, but is not limited to, a visitor serving
amenity that educates and communicates the significance and value of
natural, historical, and cultural resources in a way that increases the
understanding and enjoyment of these resources and that may utilize
the expertise of a naturalist or other specialist skilled at educational
interpretation.
(j) “Local conservation corps” means a program operated by a
public agency or nonprofit organization that meets the requirements of
Section 14406.
(k) “Nonprofit organization” means any nonprofit corporation

text of proposed laws
qualified to do business in California, and qualified under Section
501 (c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
(l) “Preservation” means rehabilitation, stabilization, restoration,
development, and reconstruction, or any combination of those activities.
(m) “Protection” means those actions necessary to prevent harm
or damage to persons, property or natural resources or those actions
necessary to allow the continued use and enjoyment of property or natural
resources and includes acquisition, development, restoration, preservation
and interpretation.
(n) “Restoration” means the improvement of physical structures
or facilities and, in the case of natural systems and landscape features
includes, but is not limited to, projects for the control of erosion, the
control and elimination of exotic species, prescribed burning, fuel hazard
reduction, fencing out threats to existing or restored natural resources,
road elimination, and other plant and wildlife habitat improvement to
increase the natural system value of the property. Restoration projects
shall include the planning, monitoring and reporting necessary to ensure
successful implementation of the project objectives.
(o) “Secretary” means the Secretary of the Resources Agency.
(p) “State Board” means the State Water Resources Control Board.
75009. The proceeds of bonds issued and sold pursuant to this
division shall be deposited in the Safe Drinking Water, Water Quality
and Supply, Flood Control, River and Coastal Protection Fund of 2006,
which is hereby created. Except as specifically provided in this division
the money shall be available for appropriation by the Legislature, in the
manner and for the purposes set forth in this division in accordance with
the following schedule:
(a) The sum of one billion five hundred twenty five million dollars
($1,525,000,000) for safe drinking water, water quality and other water
projects in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 2.
(b) The sum of eight hundred million dollars ($800,000,000) for
flood control projects in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3.
(c) The sum of sixty five million dollars ($65,000,000) for statewide
water management in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 4.
(d) The sum of nine hundred twenty eight million dollars
($928,000,000) for the protection of rivers, lakes and streams in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 5.
(e) The sum of four hundred fi fty million dollars ($450,000,000)
for forest and wildlife conservation in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 6.
(f) The sum of five hundred forty million dollars ($540,000,000)
for the protection of beaches, bays, and coastal waters and watersheds in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 7.
(g) The sum of five hundred million dollars ($500,000,000) for state
parks and nature education facilities in accordance with Chapter 8.
(h) The sum of five hundred eighty million dollars ($580,000,000)
for sustainable communities and climate change reduction projects in
accordance with Chapter 9.

CHAPTER 2.

SAFE DRINKING WATER AND WATER
QUALITY PROJECTS

75020. This chapter is intended to provide the funds necessary to
address the most critical water needs of the state including the provision of
safe drinking water to all Californians, the protection of water quality and
the environment, and the improvement of water supply reliability.
75021. (a) The sum of ten million dollars ($10,000,000) shall
be available to the Department of Health Services for grants and direct
expenditures to fund emergency and urgent actions to ensure that safe
drinking water supplies are available to all Californians. Eligible projects
include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Providing alternate water supplies including bottled water where
necessary to protect public health.
(2) Improvements in existing water systems necessary to prevent
contamination or provide other sources of safe drinking water including
replacement wells.
(3) Establishing connections to an adjacent water system.
(4) Design, purchase, installation and initial operation costs for
water treatment equipment and systems.

Text of Proposed Laws | 139

84

text of proposed laws

84

(b) Grants and expenditures shall not exceed $250,000 per project.
(c) Direct expenditures for the purposes of this section shall be
exempt from contracting and procurement requirements to the extent
necessary to take immediate action to protect public health and safety.
75022. The sum of one hundred eighty million dollars ($180,000,000)
shall be available to the Department of Health Services for grants for
small community drinking water system infrastructure improvements
and related actions to meet safe drinking water standards. Priority shall
be given to projects that address chemical and nitrate contaminants,
other health hazards and by whether the community is disadvantaged
or severely disadvantaged. Special consideration shall be given to small
communities with limited financial resources. Eligible recipients include
public agencies and incorporated mutual water companies that serve
disadvantaged communities. The Department of Health Services may
make grants for the purpose of financing feasibility studies and to meet
the eligibility requirements for a construction grant. Construction grants
shall be limited to $5,000,000 per project and not more than twenty five
percent of a grant may be awarded in advance of actual expenditures. The
Department of Health Services may expend up to $5,000,000 of the funds
allocated in this section for technical assistance to eligible communities.
75023. For the purpose of providing the state share needed to
leverage federal funds to assist communities in providing safe drinking
water, the sum of fi fty million dollars ($50,000,000) shall be available
for deposit into the Safe Drinking Water State Revolving Fund (Section
116760.30 of the Health and Safety Code).
75024. For the purpose of providing the state share needed to
leverage federal funds to assist communities in making those infrastructure
investments necessary to prevent pollution of drinking water sources, the
sum of eighty million dollars ($80,000,000) shall be available for deposit
into the State Water Pollution Control Revolving Fund (Section 13477 of
the Water Code).
75025. The sum of sixty million dollars ($60,000,000) shall be
available to the Department of Health Services for the purpose of loans
and grants for projects to prevent or reduce contamination of groundwater
that serves as a source of drinking water. The Department of Health
Services shall require repayment for costs that are subsequently recovered
from parties responsible for the contamination. The Legislature may enact
legislation necessary to implement this section.
75026. (a) The sum of one billion dollars ($1,000,000,000) shall
be available to the department for grants for projects that assist local
public agencies to meet the long term water needs of the state including the
delivery of safe drinking water and the protection of water quality and the
environment. Eligible projects must implement integrated regional water
management plans that meet the requirements of this section. Integrated
regional water management plans shall identify and address the major
water related objectives and conflicts within the region, consider all of
the resource management strategies identified in the California Water
Plan, and use an integrated, multi-benefit approach to project selection
and design. Plans shall include performance measures and monitoring
to document progress toward meeting plan objectives. Projects that may
be funded pursuant to this section must be consistent with an adopted
integrated regional water management plan or its functional equivalent
as defined in the department’s Integrated Regional Water Management
Guidelines, must provide multiple benefits, and must include one or more
of the following project elements:
(1) Water supply reliability, water conservation and water use
efficiency.
(2) Storm water capture, storage, clean-up, treatment, and
management.
(3) Removal of invasive non-native species, the creation and
enhancement of wetlands, and the acquisition, protection, and restoration
of open space and watershed lands.
(4) Non-point source pollution reduction, management and
monitoring.
(5) Groundwater recharge and management projects.
(6) Contaminant and salt removal through reclamation, desalting,
and other treatment technologies and conveyance of reclaimed water for
distribution to users.
(7) Water banking, exchange, reclamation and improvement of
water quality.

140 | Text of Proposed Laws

(8) Planning and implementation of multipurpose flood management
programs.
(9) Watershed protection and management.
(10) Drinking water treatment and distribution.
(11) Ecosystem and fisheries restoration and protection.
(b) The Department of Water Resources shall give preference to
proposals that satisfy the following criteria:
(1) Proposals that effectively integrate water management programs
and projects within a hydrologic region identified in the California Water
Plan; the Regional Water Quality Control Board region or subdivision or
other region or sub-region specifically identified by the department.
(2) Proposals that effectively integrate water management with land
use planning.
(3) Proposals that effectively resolve significant water-related
conflicts within or between regions.
(4) Proposals that contribute to the attainment of one or more of the
objectives of the CALFED Bay-Delta Program.
(5) Proposals that address statewide priorities.
(6) Proposals that address critical water supply or water quality
needs for disadvantaged communities within the region.
(c) Not more than 5% of the funds provided by this section may be
used for grants or direct expenditures for the development, updating or
improvement of integrated regional water management plans.
(d) The department shall coordinate the provisions of this section
with the program provided in Chapter 8 of Division 26.5 of the Water Code
and may implement this section using existing Integrated Regional Water
Management Guidelines.
75027. (a) The funding provided in Section 75026 shall be allocated
to each hydrologic region as identified in the California Water Plan and
listed below. For the South Coast Region, the department shall establish
three sub-regions that reflect the San Diego county watersheds, the Santa
Ana River watershed, and the Los Angeles—Ventura County watersheds
respectively, and allocate funds to those sub-regions. The North and
South Lahontan regions shall be treated as one region for the purpose
of allocating funds, but the department may require separate regional
plans. Funds provided in Section 75026 shall be allocated according to the
following schedule:
(1) North Coast
$37,000,000
(2) San Francisco Bay
$138,000,000
(3) Central Coast
$52,000,000
(4) Los Angeles sub-region
$215,000,000
(5) Santa Ana sub-region
$114,000,000
(6) San Diego sub-region
$91,000,000
(7) Sacramento River
$73,000,000
(8) San Joaquin River
$57,000,000
(9) Tulare/Kern (Tulare Lake)
$60,000,000
(10) North/South Lahontan
$27,000,000
(11) Colorado River Basin
$36,000,000
(12) Inter-regional/Unallocated
$100,000,000
(b) The interregional and unallocated funds provided in subdivision
(a) may be expended directly or granted by the department to address
multi-regional needs or issues of statewide significance.
75028. (a) The department shall allocate grants on a competitive
basis within each identified hydrologic region or sub-region pursuant to
Section 75027. The department may establish standards and procedures
for the development and approval of local project selection processes
within hydrologic regions and sub-regions identified in Section 75027.
The department shall defer to approved local project selection, and review
projects only for consistency with the purposes of Section 75026.
(b) If a hydrologic region or sub-region identified in Section 75027
does not have any adopted plan that meets the requirements of Section
75026 at the time of the department’s grant selection process, the funds
allocated to that hydrologic region or sub-region shall not be reallocated
to another region but will remain unallocated until such time as an
adopted plan from the hydrologic region or sub-region is submitted to the
department.
75029. The sum of one hundred thirty million dollars ($130,000,000)

text of proposed laws

(PROPOSITION 84 CONTINUED)

shall be available to the department for grants to implement Delta water
quality improvement projects that protect drinking water supplies. The
department shall require a cost share from local agencies. Eligible
projects are:
(a) Projects that reduce or eliminate discharges of salt, dissolved
organic carbon, pesticides, pathogens and other pollutants to the San
Joaquin River. Not less than forty million ($40,000,000) shall be available
to implement projects to reduce or eliminate discharges of subsurface
agricultural drain water from the west side of the San Joaquin Valley for
the purpose of improving water quality in the San Joaquin River and the
Delta.
(b) Projects that reduce or eliminate discharges of bromide,
dissolved organic carbon, salt, pesticides and pathogens from discharges
to the Sacramento River.
(c) Projects at Franks Tract and other locations in the Delta that
will reduce salinity or other pollutants at agricultural and drinking water
intakes.
(d) Projects identified in the June 2005 Delta Region Drinking Water
Quality Management Plan, with a priority for design and construction of
the relocation of drinking water intake facilities for in-delta water users.
75029.5. The sum of fi fteen million dollars ($15,000,000) shall be
available to the state board for grants to public agencies and non-profit
organizations for projects that reduce the discharge of pollutants from
agricultural operations into surface waters of the state.

CHAPTER 3. FLOOD CONTROL
75030. This chapter is intended to provide the funding needed
to address short term flood control needs such as levee inspection and
evaluation, floodplain mapping and improving the effectiveness of
emergency response, and providing funding for critical immediate flood
control needs throughout the state. It is also intended to provide a framework
to support long term strategies that will require the establishment of more
effective levee maintenance programs, better floodplain management
and more balanced allocation of liability and responsibility between the
federal, state and local governments.
75031. The sum of thirty million dollars ($30,000,000) shall
be available to the department for the purposes of floodplain mapping,
assisting local land-use planning, and to avoid or reduce future flood risks
and damages. Eligible projects include, but are not limited to:
(a) Mapping floodplains.
(b) Mapping rural areas with potential for urbanization.
(c) Mapping and identification of flood risk in high density urban
areas.
(d) Mapping flood hazard areas.
(e) Updating outdated floodplain maps.
(f) Mapping of riverine floodplains, alluvial fans, and coastal flood
hazard areas.
(g) Collecting topographic and hydrographic survey data.
75032. The sum of two hundred seventy five million dollars
($275,000,000) shall be available to the department for the following flood
control projects:
(a) The inspection and evaluation of the integrity and capability
of existing flood control project facilities and the development of an
economically viable flood control rehabilitation plan.
(b) Improvement, construction, modification, and relocation of
flood control levees, weirs, or bypasses including repair of critical bank
and levee erosion.
(c) Projects to improve the department’s emergency response
capability.
(d) Environmental mitigation and infrastructure relocation costs
related to projects under this section.
(e) To the extent feasible, the department shall implement a multiobjective management approach for floodplains that would include, but
not be limited to, increased flood protection, ecosystem restoration, and
farmland protection.
75032.4. Notwithstanding Section 13340 of the Government
Code, the funds allocated in Sections 75031 and 75032 are continuously

appropriated to the department for the purposes of those sections.
75032.5. The sum of forty million dollars ($40,000,000) shall be
available to the department for Flood Protection Corridor projects that
are consistent with Water Code Section 79037.
75033. The sum of two hundred seventy five million dollars
($275,000,000) shall be available to the department for flood control
projects in the Delta designed to increase the department’s ability to
respond to levee breaches and to reduce the potential for levee failures.
The funds provided by this section shall be available for the following
purposes:
(a) Projects to improve emergency response preparedness.
(b) Local assistance under the delta levee maintenance subventions
program under Part 9 (commencing with Section 12980) of Division 6 of
the Water Code.
(c) Special flood protection projects under Chapter 2 (commencing
with Section 12310) of Part 4.8 of Division 6 of the Water Code, including
projects for the acquisition, preservation, protection and restoration of
Delta lands for the purpose of flood control and to meet multiple objectives
such as drinking water quality ecosystem restoration and water supply
reliability.
(d) All projects shall be subject to the provisions of Water Code
Section 79050.
75034. The sum of one hundred eighty million dollars ($180,000,000)
shall be available to the department for the purposes of funding the
state’s share of the nonfederal costs of flood control and flood prevention
projects for which assurances required by the federal government have
been provided by a local agency and which have been authorized under
the State Water Resources Law of 1945 (Chapter 1 (commencing with
Section 12570) and Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 12639) of Part 6
of Division 6 of the Water Code), the Flood Control Law of 1946 (Chapter
3 (commencing with Section 12800) of Part 6 of Division 6 of the Water
Code), and the California Watershed Protection and Flood Prevention Law
(Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 12850) of Part 6 of Division 6 of the
Water Code), including the credits and loans to local agencies pursuant
to Sections 12585.3 and 12585.4, subdivision (d) of Section 12585.5, and
Sections 12866.3 and 12866.4 of the Water Code, and to implement Chapter
3.5 (commencing with Section 12840) of Part 6 of Division 6 of the Water
Code. Projects eligible for funding pursuant to this section shall comply
with the requirements of AB 1147 (Statutes of 2000, Chapter 1071).

CHAPTER 4.

STATEWIDE WATER PLANNING AND DESIGN

75041. The sum of sixty five million dollars ($65,000,000) shall be
available to the department for planning and feasibility studies related
to the existing and potential future needs for California’s water supply,
conveyance and flood control systems. The studies shall be designed to
promote integrated, multi-benefit approaches that maximize the public
benefits of the overall system including protection of the public from
floods, water supply reliability, water quality, and fish, wildlife and habitat
protection and restoration. Projects to be funded include:
(a) Evaluation of climate change impacts on the state’s water
supply and flood control systems and the development of system redesign
alternatives to improve adaptability and public benefits.
(b) Surface water storage planning and feasibility studies pursuant
to the CALFED Bay-Delta Program.
(c) Modeling and feasibility studies to evaluate the potential for
improving flood protection and water supply through coordinating
groundwater storage and reservoir operations.
(d) Other planning and feasibility studies necessary to improve the
integration of flood control and water supply systems.

CHAPTER 5.

PROTECTION OF RIVERS, LAKES AND STREAMS

75050. The sum of nine hundred twenty eight million dollars
($928,000,000) shall be available for the protection and restoration of
rivers, lakes and streams, their watersheds and associated land, water,
and other natural resources in accordance with the following schedule:
(a) The sum of one hundred eighty million dollars ($180,000,000)
shall be available to the Department of Fish and Game, in consultation with
the department, for Bay-Delta and coastal fishery restoration projects. Of

Text of Proposed Laws | 141

84

text of proposed laws

84

the funds provided in this section, up to $20,000,000 shall be available
for the development of a natural community conservation plan for the
CALFED Bay-Delta Program and up to $45,000,000 shall be available for
coastal salmon and steelhead fishery restoration projects that support the
development and implementation of species recovery plans and strategies
for salmonid species listed as threatened or endangered under state or
federal law.
(b) The sum of ninety million dollars ($90,000,000) shall be
available for projects related to the Colorado River in accordance with
the following schedule:
(1) Not more than $36,000,000 shall be available to the department
for water conservation projects that implement the Allocation Agreement
as defined in the Quantification Settlement Agreement.
(2) Not more than $7,000,000 shall be available to the Department
of Fish and Game for projects to implement the Lower Colorado River
Multi-Species Habitat Conservation Plan.
(3) $47,000,000 shall be available for deposit into the Salton Sea
Restoration Fund.
(c) The sum of fi fty four million dollars ($54,000,000) shall be
available to the department for development, rehabilitation, acquisition,
and restoration costs related to providing public access to recreation
and fish and wildlife resources in connection with state water project
obligations pursuant to Water Code Section 11912.
(d) The sum of seventy two million dollars ($72,000,000) shall be
available to the secretary for projects in accordance with the California
River Parkways Act of 2004 Chapter 3.8 (commencing with Section 5750)
of Division 5. Up to $10,000,000 may be transferred to the Department of
Conservation for the Watershed Coordinator Grant Program.
(e) The sum of eighteen million dollars ($18,000,000) shall be
available to the department for the Urban Streams Restoration Program
pursuant to Water Code Section 7048.
(f) The sum of thirty six million dollars ($36,000,000) shall
be available for river parkway projects to the San Joaquin River
Conservancy.
(g) The sum of seventy two million dollars ($72,000,000) shall be
available for projects within the watersheds of the Los Angeles and San
Gabriel Rivers according to the following schedule:
(1) $36,000,000 to the San Gabriel and Lower Los Angeles Rivers
and Mountains Conservancy pursuant to Division 22.8 (commencing with
Section 32600).
(2) $36,000,000 to the Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy
for implementation of watershed protection activities throughout the
watershed of the Upper Los Angeles River pursuant to Section 79508 of
the Water Code.
(h) The sum of thirty six million dollars ($36,000,000) shall be
available for the Coachella Valley Mountains Conservancy.
(i) The sum of forty five million dollars ($45,000,000) shall be
available for projects to expand and improve the Santa Ana River Parkway.
Project funding shall be appropriated to the State Coastal Conservancy
for projects developed in consultation with local government agencies
participating in the development of the Santa Ana River Parkway. Of
the amount provided in this paragraph the sum of thirty million dollars
($30,000,000) shall be equally divided between projects in Orange, San
Bernardino and Riverside Counties.
(j) The sum of fi fty four million dollars ($54,000,000) shall be
available for the Sierra Nevada Conservancy.
(k) The sum of thirty six million dollars ($36,000,000) shall be
available for the California Tahoe Conservancy.
(l) The sum of forty five million dollars ($45,000,000) shall be
available to the California Conservation Corps for resource conservation
and restoration projects and for facilities acquisition, development,
restoration, and rehabilitation and for grants and state administrative
costs, in accordance with the following schedule:
(1) The sum of twenty five million dollars ($25,000,000) shall be
available for projects to improve public safety and improve and restore
watersheds including regional and community fuel load reduction projects
on public lands, and stream and river restoration projects. Not less than 50%
of these funds shall be in the form of grants to local conservation corps.
(2) The sum of twenty million dollars ($20,000,000) shall be
available for grants to local conservation corps for acquisition and

142 | Text of Proposed Laws

development of facilities to support local conservation corps programs,
and for local resource conservation activities.
(m) The sum of ninety million dollars ($90,000,000) to the state
board for matching grants to local public agencies for the reduction and
prevention of stormwater contamination of rivers, lakes, and streams. The
Legislature may enact legislation to implement this subdivision.
(n) The sum of one hundred million dollars ($100,000,000) shall
be available to the secretary for the purpose of implementing a court
settlement to restore flows and naturally-reproducing and self-sustaining
populations of salmon to the San Joaquin River between Friant Dam and
the Merced River. These funds shall be available for channel and structural
improvements, and related research pursuant to the court settlement. The
secretary is authorized to enter into a cost-sharing agreement with the
United States Secretary of the Interior and other parties, as necessary, to
implement this provision.

CHAPTER 6.

FOREST AND WILDLIFE CONSERVATION

75055. The sum of four hundred fi fty million dollars ($450,000,000)
shall be available for the protection and conservation of forests and wildlife
habitat according to the following schedule:
(a) Notwithstanding Section 13340 of the Government Code, the
sum of one hundred eighty million dollars ($180,000,000) is continuously
appropriated to the board for forest conservation and protection projects.
The goal of this grant program is to promote the ecological integrity and
economic stability of California’s diverse native forests for all their public
benefits through forest conservation, preservation and restoration of
productive managed forest lands, forest reserve areas, redwood forests
and other forest types, including the conservation of water resources and
natural habitats for native fish, wildlife and plants found on these lands.
(b) (1) Notwithstanding Section 13340 of the Government Code, the
sum of one hundred thirty five million dollars ($135,000,000) is hereby
continuously appropriated to the board for the development, rehabilitation,
restoration, acquisition and protection of habitat that accomplishes one or
more of the following objectives:
(A) Promotes the recovery of threatened and endangered species.
(B) Provides corridors linking separate habitat areas to prevent
fragmentation.
(C) Protects significant natural landscapes and ecosystems such as
old growth redwoods, mixed conifer forests and oak woodlands, riparian
and wetland areas, and other significant habitat areas.
(D) Implements the recommendations of California Comprehensive
Wildlife Strategy, as submitted October 2005 to the United States Fish and
Wildlife Service.
(2) Funds authorized by this subdivision may be used for direct
expenditures or for grants and for related state administrative costs,
pursuant to the Wildlife Conservation Law of 1947, Chapter 4 (commencing
with Section 1300) of Division 2 of the Fish and Game Code, the Oak
Woodland Conservation Act, Article 3.5 (commencing with Section 1360)
of Chapter 4 of Division 2 of the Fish and Game Code, and the California
Rangeland, Grazing Land and Grassland Protection Act, commencing
with Section 10330 of Division 10.4. Funds scheduled in this subdivision
may be used to prepare management plans for properties acquired by the
Wildlife Conservation Board and for the development of scientific data,
habitat mapping and other research information necessary to determine
the priorities for restoration and acquisition statewide.
(3) Up to twenty five million dollars ($25,000,000) may be granted
to the University of California for the Natural Reserve System for matching
grants for land acquisition and for the construction and development
of facilities that will be used for research and training to improve the
management of natural lands and the preservation of California’s wildlife
resources.
(c) The sum of ninety million dollars ($90,000,000) shall be
available to the board for grants to implement or assist in the establishment
of Natural Community Conservation Plans, Chapter 10 (commencing with
Section 2800) of Division 3 of the Fish and Game Code.
(d) The sum of forty five million dollars ($45,000,000) shall be
available for the protection of ranches, farms, and oak woodlands
according the following schedule:
(1) Grazing land protection pursuant to the California Rangeland,
Grazing Land and Grassland Protection Act, commencing with Section

(PROPOSITION 84 CONTINUED)

10330 of Division 10.4.........$15,000,000.
(2) Oak Woodland Preservation pursuant to Article 3.5 (commencing
with Section 1360) of Chapter 4 of Division 2 of the Fish and Game
Code....$15,000,000.
(3) Agricultural land preservation pursuant to the California
Farmland Conservancy Program Act of 1995, Article 1 (commencing with
Section 10200) of Division 10.2.......$10,000,000.
(4) To the board for grants to assist farmers in integrating
agricultural activities with ecosystem restoration and wildlife
protection.....$5,000,000.

CHAPTER 7.

PROTECTION OF BEACHES, BAYS AND
COASTAL WATERS

75060. The sum of five hundred forty million dollars ($540,000,000)
shall be available for the protection of beaches, bays and coastal waters and
watersheds, including projects to prevent contamination and degradation
of coastal waters and watersheds, projects to protect and restore the
natural habitat values of coastal waters and lands, and projects and
expenditures to promote access to and enjoyment of the coastal resources
of the state, in accordance with the following schedule:
(a) The sum of ninety million dollars ($90,000,000) shall be available
to the state board for the purpose of matching grants for protecting beaches
and coastal waters from pollution and toxic contamination pursuant to the
Clean Beaches Program, Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 30915) of
Division 20.4. Not less than $35,000,000 shall be for grants to local public
agencies to assist those agencies to comply with the discharge prohibition
into Areas of Special Biological Significance contained in the California
Ocean Plan. Not less than 20% of the funds allocated by this subdivision
shall be available to the Santa Monica Bay Restoration Commission.
(b) The sum of one hundred thirty five million dollars ($135,000,000)
shall be available for the State Coastal Conservancy for expenditure
pursuant to Division 21.
(c) The sum of one hundred eight million dollars ($108,000,000)
shall be available for the San Francisco Bay Area Conservancy Program
pursuant to Chapter 4.5 of Division 21. Not less than 20% of the funds
allocated by this paragraph shall be expended on projects in watersheds
draining directly to the Pacific Ocean.
(d) The sum of forty five million dollars ($45,000,000) for the
protection of the Santa Monica Bay and its watersheds shall be available
as follows:
(1) To the Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy pursuant to
Division 23 (commencing with Section 33000)........$20,000,000.
(2) To the Baldwin Hills Conservancy for the protection of the
Ballona Creek/Baldwin Hills watershed......$10,000,000.
(3) To the Rivers and Mountains Conservancy......$15,000,000.
(e) The sum of forty five million dollars ($45,000,000) for the
protection of Monterey Bay and its watersheds shall be available to the
State Coastal Conservancy.
(f) The sum of twenty seven million dollars ($27,000,000) for the
protection of San Diego Bay and adjacent watersheds shall be available to
the State Coastal Conservancy.
(g) The sum of ninety million dollars ($90,000,000) shall be
allocated to the California Ocean Protection Trust Fund (Chapter 4
(commencing with Section 35650) of Division 26.5) and available for the
purposes of projects consistent with Section 35650. Priority projects shall
include the development of scientific data needed to adaptively manage
the state’s marine resources and reserves, including the development of
marine habitat maps, the development and implementation of projects to
foster sustainable fisheries using loans and grants, and the development
and implementation of projects to conserve marine wildlife.

CHAPTER 8.

PARKS AND NATURE EDUCATION FACILITIES

75063. The sum of five hundred million dollars ($500,000,000)
shall be available to provide public access to the resources of the State
of California, including its rivers, lakes and streams, its beaches, bays
and coastal waters, to protect those resources for future generations, and
to increase public understanding and knowledge of those resources, in
accordance with the following schedule:

text of proposed laws
(a) The sum of four hundred million dollars ($400,000,000) shall
be available to the Department of Parks and Recreation for development,
acquisition, interpretation, restoration and rehabilitation of the state
park system and its natural, historical, and visitor serving resources. The
Department of Parks and Recreation shall include the following goals in
setting spending priorities for the funds appropriated pursuant to this
section:
(1) The restoration, rehabilitation and improvement of existing state
park system lands and facilities.
(2) The expansion of the state park system to reflect the growing
population and shifting population centers and needs of the state.
(3) The protection of representative natural resources based on the
criteria and priorities identified in Section 75071.
(b) The sum of one hundred million dollars ($100,000,000) shall
be available to the Department of Parks and Recreation for grants
for nature education and research facilities and equipment to nonprofit organizations and public institutions, including natural history
museums, aquariums, research facilities and botanical gardens. Eligible
institutions include those that combine the study of natural science with
preservation, demonstration and education programs that serve diverse
populations, institutions that provide collections and programs related
to the relationship of Native American cultures to the environment, and
institutions for marine wildlife conservation research. Grants may be used
for buildings, structures and exhibit galleries that present the collections
to inspire and educate the public and for marine wildlife conservation
research equipment and facilities.

CHAPTER 9.

SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES AND CLIMATE
CHANGE REDUCTION

75065. The sum of five hundred eighty million dollars ($580,000,000)
shall be available for improving the sustainability and livability of
California’s communities through investment in natural resources. The
purposes of this chapter include reducing urban communities’ contribution
to global warming and increasing their adaptability to climate change
while improving the quality of life in those communities. Funds shall be
available in accordance with the following schedule:
(a) The sum of ninety million dollars ($90,000,000) shall be available
for urban greening projects that reduce energy consumption, conserve
water, improve air and water quality, and provide other community
benefits. Priority shall be given to projects that provide multiple benefits,
use existing public lands, serve communities with the greatest need, and
facilitate joint use of public resources and investments including schools.
Implementing legislation shall provide for planning grants for urban
greening programs. Not less than $20,000,000 shall be available for
urban forestry projects pursuant to the California Urban Forestry Act,
Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 4799.06) of Part 2.5 of Division 1.
(b) The sum of four hundred million dollars ($400,000,000) shall
be available to the Department of Parks and Recreation for competitive
grants for local and regional parks. Funds provided in this subdivision
may be allocated to existing programs or pursuant to legislation enacted
to implement this subdivision, subject to the following considerations:
(1) Acquisition and development of new parks and expansion of
overused parks that provide park and recreational access to underserved
communities shall be given preference.
(2) Creation of parks in neighborhoods where none currently exist
shall be given preference.
(3) Outreach and technical assistance shall be provided to
underserved communities to encourage full participation in the program
or programs.
(4) Preference shall be given to applicants that actively involve
community based groups in the selection and planning of projects.
(5) Projects will be designed to provide efficient use of water and
other natural resources.
(c) The sum of ninety million dollars ($90,000,000) shall be available
for planning grants and planning incentives, including revolving loan
programs and other methods to encourage the development of regional
and local land use plans that are designed to promote water conservation,
reduce automobile use and fuel consumption, encourage greater infill and
compact development, protect natural resources and agricultural lands,
and revitalize urban and community centers.

Text of Proposed Laws | 143

84

text of proposed laws
75066. Appropriation of the funds provided in subdivisions (a) and
(c) of Section 75065 may only be made upon enactment of legislation to
implement that subdivision.

CHAPTER 10.

84

MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

75070. Every proposed activity or project to be financed pursuant
to this division shall be in compliance with the California Environmental
Quality Act, Division 13 (commencing with Section 21000).
75070.4. Acquisitions of real property pursuant to Chapters 5, 6, 7,
8, and 9 shall be from willing sellers.
75070.5. Not more than 5% of the funds allocated to any program
in this division may be used to pay the costs incurred in the administration
of that program.
75071. In evaluating potential projects that include acquisition or
restoration for the purpose of natural resource protection, the Department
of Parks and Recreation, the board, and the State Coastal Conservancy
shall give priority to projects that demonstrate one or more of the following
characteristics:
(a) Landscape /Habitat Linkages: properties that link to, or
contribute to linking, existing protected areas with other large blocks of
protected habitat. Linkages must serve to connect existing protected areas,
facilitate wildlife movement or botanical transfer, and result in sustainable
combined acreage.
(b) Watershed Protection: projects that contribute to long-term
protection of and improvement to the water and biological quality of the
streams, aquifers, and terrestrial resources of priority watersheds of
the major biological regions of the state as identified by the Resources
Agency.
(c) Properties that support relatively large areas of under-protected
major habitat types.
(d) Properties that provide habitat linkages between two or more
major biological regions of the state.
(e) Properties for which there is a non-state matching contribution
toward the acquisition, restoration, stewardship or management costs.
Matching contributions can be either monetary or in the form of services,
including volunteer services.
(f) At least fourteen days before approving an acquisition project
funded by this division, an agency subject to this section shall submit to the
Resources Agency and post on its website an explanation as to whether and
how the proposed acquisition meets criteria established in this section.
75071.5. The Department of Parks and Recreation, the board,
and the State Coastal Conservancy shall work with the United States
Department of Defense to coordinate the development of buffer areas
around military facilities that facilitate the continued operation of those
facilities and promote the conservation and recreation goals of the state.
To the extent consistent with this division, agencies may provide funding to
support projects that meet the purposes of this section.
75072. Up to 10 percent of funds allocated for each program funded
by this division may be used to finance planning and monitoring necessary
for the successful design, selection, and implementation of the projects
authorized under that program. This provision shall not otherwise restrict
funds ordinarily used by an agency for “preliminary plans,” “working
drawings,” and “construction” as defined in the Annual Budget Act for
a capital outlay project or grant project. Water quality monitoring shall
be integrated into the Surface Water Ambient Monitoring Program
administered by the state board.
75072.5. For the purposes of Section 75060(e), “Monterey Bay and
its watersheds” shall be considered to be watersheds of those rivers and
streams in Santa Cruz and Monterey Counties flowing to the Monterey Bay
southward to, and including, the Carmel River watershed.
75072.6. For purposes of Section 75060(f), “San Diego Bay and
adjacent watersheds” includes the coastal and bay watersheds within San
Diego County.
75072.7. For purposes of Section 75060(d), “Santa Monica Bay
and watershed” includes the coastal and bay watersheds in Ventura and
Los Angeles Counties from Calleguas Creek southward to the San Gabriel
River.
75073. Funds scheduled in Chapter 5, 6, 7 and 8 of this division
that are not designated for competitive grant programs may also be used

144 | Text of Proposed Laws

for the purposes of reimbursing the General Fund, pursuant to the Natural
Heritage Preservation Tax Credit Act of 2000 (Division 28 (commencing
with Section 37000)).
75074. In enacting Chapters 5, 6, 7 and 8 of this division it is the
intent of the people that when a project or program is funded herein, funds
for such program or project may be used to the full extent authorized by the
statute governing the program or conservancy receiving such funds.
75075. The body awarding any contract for a public works project
financed in any part from funds made available pursuant to this division
shall adopt and enforce, or contract with a third party to enforce, a labor
compliance program pursuant to subdivision (b) of Labor Code Section
1771.5 for application to that public works project.
75076. Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section 11340) of Part
1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code does not apply to the
development and adoption of program guidelines and selection criteria
adopted pursuant to this chapter.
75077. Funds provided pursuant to this chapter, and any
appropriation or transfer of those funds, shall not be deemed to be a
transfer of funds for the purposes of Chapter 9 (commencing with Section
2780) of Division 3 of the Fish and Game Code.
75078. The Secretary shall provide for an independent audit
of expenditures pursuant to this division to ensure that all moneys are
expended in accordance with the requirements of this division. The
secretary shall publish a list of all program and project expenditures
pursuant to this division not less than annually, in written form, and shall
post an electronic form of the list on the Resources Agency’s Internet
Website.
75079. The Secretary shall appoint a citizen advisory committee
to review the annual audit and to identify and recommend actions to
ensure that the intent and purposes of this division are met by the agencies
responsible for implementation of this division.

CHAPTER 11.

FISCAL PROVISIONS

75080. Bonds in the total amount of five billion three hundred and
eighty eight million dollars ($5,388,000,000), not including the amount of
any refunding bonds issued in accordance with Section 75088, or so much
thereof as is necessary, may be issued and sold to be used for carrying
out the purposes set forth in this division and to be used to reimburse the
General Obligation Bond Expense Revolving Fund pursuant to Section
16724.5 of the Government Code. The bond proceeds shall be deposited in
the Safe Drinking Water, Water Quality and Supply, Flood Control, River
and Coastal Protection Fund of 2006 created by Section 75009. The bonds
shall, when sold, be and constitute a valid and binding obligation of the
State of California, and the full faith and credit of the State of California is
hereby pledged for the punctual payment of both principal of and interest
on the bonds as they become due and payable.
75081. The bonds authorized by this division shall be prepared,
executed, issued, sold, paid, and redeemed as provided in the State
General Obligation Bond Law, Chapter 4 (commencing with Section
16720) of Part 3 of Division 4 of Title 2 of the Government Code, and all
provisions of that law shall apply to the bonds and to this division and are
hereby incorporated in this division by this reference as though fully set
forth in this division.
75082. (a) Solely for the purpose of authorizing the issuance and
sale, pursuant to the State General Obligation Bond Law, of the bonds
authorized by this division, the Safe Drinking Water, Water Quality and
Supply, Flood Control, River and Coastal Protection Finance Committee
is hereby created. For purposes of this division, the Safe Drinking Water,
Water Quality and Supply, Flood Control, River and Coastal Protection
Finance Committee is “the committee” as that term is used by the
State General Obligation Bond Law. The committee shall consist of the
Controller, the Director of Finance, and the Treasurer, or their designated
representatives. The Treasurer shall serve as chairperson of the committee.
A majority of the committee may act for the committee.
(b) For purposes of this chapter and the State General Obligation
Bond Law, the secretary is designated as “the board.”
75083. The committee shall determine whether or not it is necessary
or desirable to issue bonds authorized pursuant to this division in order
to carry out the actions specified in this division and, if so, the amount of
bonds to be issued and sold. Successive issues of bonds may be authorized

(PROPOSITION 84 CONTINUED)

and sold to carry out those actions progressively, and it is not necessary
that all of the bonds authorized to be issued be sold at any one time.
75084. There shall be collected annually in the same manner and
at the same time as other state revenue is collected, in addition to the
ordinary revenues of the state, a sum in an amount required to pay the
principal of, and interest on, the bonds maturing each year, and it is the
duty of all officers charged by law with any duty in regard to the collection
of the revenue to do so and perform each and every act that is necessary to
collect that additional sum.
75085. Notwithstanding Section 13340 of the Government Code,
there is hereby appropriated from the General Fund, for purposes of this
division, an amount that will equal the total of the following:
(a) The sum annually necessary to pay the principal of, and interest
on, bonds issued and sold pursuant to this division, as the principal and
interest become due and payable.
(b) The sum which is necessary to carry out the provisions of Section
75086, appropriated without regard to fiscal years.
75086. For the purposes of carrying out this division, the Director
of Finance may authorize the withdrawal from the General Fund of an
amount or amounts not to exceed the amount of the unsold bonds that have
been authorized to be sold for the purpose of carrying out this division.
Any amounts withdrawn shall be deposited in the fund. Any money made
available under this section shall be returned to the General Fund, plus
the interest that the amounts would have earned in the Pooled Money
Investment Account, from money received from the sale of bonds that
would otherwise be deposited in that fund.
75087. All money derived from premium and accrued interest on
bonds sold shall be reserved and shall be available for transfer to the
General Fund as a credit to expenditures for bond interest.
75088. Any bonds issued or sold pursuant to this division may be
refunded by the issuance of refunding bonds in accordance with Article
6 (commencing with Section 16780) of Chapter 4 of Part 3 of Division 4
of Title 2 of the Government Code. Approval by the electors of the state
for the issuance of the bonds shall include approval of the issuance of
any bonds issued to refund any bonds originally issued or any previously
issued refunding bonds.
75090. The people of California hereby find and declare that
inasmuch as the proceeds from the sale of bonds authorized by this
division are not “proceeds of taxes” as that term is used in Article XIII B
of the California Constitution, the disbursement of these proceeds is not
subject to the limitation imposed by that article.
SEC. 2. If any provision of this Act or the application thereof is held
invalid, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the
act which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application,
and to this end the provisions of this act are severable.
SEC. 3. This Act is an exercise of the public power of the People of
the State of California for the protection of their health, safety, and welfare
and shall be liberally construed to effectuate those purposes.

PROPOSITION 85
This initiative measure is submitted to the people in accordance with
the provisions of Article II, Section 8 of the California Constitution.
This initiative measure expressly amends the California Constitution
by adding a section thereto; therefore, new provisions proposed to be added
are printed in italic type to indicate that they are new.
PROPOSED LAW
SECTION 1. Title
This measure shall be known and may be cited as the Parents’ Right
to Know and Child Protection Initiative.
SEC. 2. Declaration of Findings and Purposes
The people of California have a special and compelling interest in
and responsibility for protecting the health and well-being of children,
ensuring that parents are properly informed of potential health-related
risks and medical decisions involving their children, and promoting and
enabling parental care and responsibility.

text of proposed laws
SEC. 3. Parental Notification
Section 32 is added to Article I of the California Constitution, to read:
SEC. 32. (a) For purposes of this section, the following terms shall
be defined to mean:
(1) “Abortion” means the use of any means to terminate the
pregnancy of an unemancipated minor known to be pregnant, except for
the purpose of producing a live birth. “Abortion” shall not include the use
of any contraceptive drug or device.
(2) “Medical emergency” means a condition which, on the basis of
the physician’s good-faith clinical judgment, so complicates the medical
condition of a pregnant unemancipated minor as to necessitate the
immediate abortion of her pregnancy to avert her death or for which a
delay will create serious risk of substantial and irreversible impairment of
a major bodily function.
(3) “Notice” means a written notification, signed and dated by a
physician or his or her agent and addressed to a parent or guardian of
an unemancipated minor, informing the parent or guardian that she is
pregnant and that she has requested an abortion.
(4) “Parent or guardian” means a person who, at the time notice or
waiver is required under this section, is either a parent if both parents have
legal custody, or the parent or person having legal custody, or the legal
guardian of an unemancipated minor.
(5) “Unemancipated minor” means a female under the age of 18 years
who has not entered into a valid marriage and is not on active duty with the
armed services of the United States and has not received a declaration of
emancipation under state law. For the purposes of this section, pregnancy
does not emancipate a female under the age of 18 years.
(6) “Physician” means any person authorized under the statutes
and regulations of the State of California to perform an abortion upon an
unemancipated minor.
(b) Notwithstanding Section 1 of Article I, or any other provision of
this Constitution or law to the contrary and except in a medical emergency
as provided for in subdivision (f), a physician shall not perform an
abortion upon a pregnant unemancipated minor until the physician or the
physician’s agent has provided written notice to her parent or guardian
personally as provided for in subdivision (c) and a reflection period of at
least 48 hours has elapsed after personal delivery of notice; or until the
physician can presume that notice has been delivered by mail as provided
in subdivision (d) and a reflection period of at least 48 hours has elapsed
after presumed delivery of notice by mail; or until the physician or the
physician’s agent has received a valid written waiver of notice as provided
for in subdivision (e); or until the physician has received a copy of a waiver
of notification from the court as provided in subdivision (h), (i), or (j). A
copy of any notice or waiver shall be retained with the unemancipated
minor’s medical records. The physician or the physician’s agent shall
inform the unemancipated minor that her parent or guardian may receive
notice as provided for in this section.
(c) The written notice shall be delivered to the parent or guardian
personally by the physician or the physician’s agent unless delivered
by mail, as provided in subdivision (d). A form for the notice shall be
prescribed by the State Department of Health Services. The notice form
shall be bilingual, in English and Spanish, and also available in English
and each of the other languages in which California Official Voter
Information Guides are published.
(d) The written notice may be delivered by certified mail addressed
to the parent or guardian at the parent’s or guardian’s last known address
with return receipt requested and restricted delivery to the addressee. To
help ensure timely notice, a copy of the written notice shall also be sent at
the same time by first-class mail to the parent or guardian. Notice can only
be presumed to have been delivered under the provisions of this subdivision
at noon of the second day after the written notice sent by certified mail was
postmarked, not counting any days on which regular mail delivery does
not take place.
(e) Notice of an unemancipated minor’s intent to obtain an abortion
and the reflection period of at least 48 hours may be waived by her parent
or guardian. The waiver must be in writing, on a form prescribed by the
State Department of Health Services, signed by a parent or guardian,
dated, and notarized. The parent or guardian shall specify on the form that
the waiver is valid for 30 days, or until a specified date, or until the minor’s
eighteenth birthday. The written waiver need not be notarized if the parent

Text of Proposed Laws | 145

84
85

text of proposed laws

85

or guardian personally delivers it to the physician or the physician’s agent.
The form shall include the following statement:
“WARNING. It is a crime to knowingly provide false information
to a physician or a physician’s agent for the purpose of inducing a
physician or a physician’s agent to believe that a waiver of notice
has been provided by a parent or guardian.” The waiver form shall be
bilingual, in English and Spanish, and also available in English and each
of the other languages in which California Official Voter Information
Guides are published. For each abortion performed on an unemancipated
minor pursuant to this subdivision, the physician or the physician’s agent
must receive a separate original written waiver that shall be retained with
the unemancipated minor’s medical records.
(f) Notice shall not be required under this section if the attending
physician certifies in the unemancipated minor’s medical records the
medical indications supporting the physician’s good-faith clinical judgment
that the abortion is necessary due to a medical emergency.
(g) Notice shall not be required under this section if waived pursuant to
this subdivision and subdivision (h), (i), or (j). If the pregnant unemancipated
minor elects not to permit notice to be given to a parent or guardian, she may
file a petition with the juvenile court. If, pursuant to this subdivision, an
unemancipated minor seeks to file a petition, the court shall assist the minor
or person designated by the minor in preparing the documents required
pursuant to this section. The petition shall set forth with specificity the minor’s
reasons for the request. The court shall ensure that the minor’s identity be
kept confidential and that all court proceedings be sealed. No filing fee shall
be required for filing a petition. The unemancipated minor shall appear
personally in the proceedings in juvenile court and may appear on her
own behalf or with counsel of her own choosing. The court shall, however,
advise her that she has a right to court-appointed counsel upon request. The
court shall appoint a guardian ad litem for her. The hearing shall be held
by 5 p.m. on the second court day after filing the petition unless extended at
the written request of the unemancipated minor, her guardian ad litem, or
her counsel. If the guardian ad litem requests an extension, that extension
may not be granted for more than one court day without the consent of the
unemancipated minor or her counsel. The unemancipated minor shall be
notified of the date, time, and place of the hearing on the petition. Judgment
shall be entered within one court day of submission of the matter. The judge
shall order a record of the evidence to be maintained, including the judge’s
written factual findings and legal conclusions supporting the decision.
(h) (1) If the judge finds, by clear and convincing evidence, that the
unemancipated minor is sufficiently mature and well-informed to decide
whether to have an abortion, the judge shall authorize a waiver of notice
of a parent or guardian.
(2) If the judge finds, by clear and convincing evidence, that notice
to a parent or guardian is not in the best interests of the unemancipated
minor, the judge shall authorize a waiver of notice. If the finding that notice
to a parent or guardian is not in the best interests of the minor is based on
evidence of physical, sexual, or emotional abuse, the court shall ensure
that such evidence is brought to the attention of the appropriate county
child protective agency.
(3) If the judge does not make a finding specified in paragraph (1) or
(2), the judge shall deny the petition.
(i) If the judge fails to rule within the time period specified in
subdivision (g) and no extension was requested and granted, the petition
shall be deemed granted and the notice requirement shall be waived.
(j) The unemancipated minor may appeal the judgment of the
juvenile court at any time after the entry of judgment. The Judicial Council
shall prescribe, by rule, the practice and procedure on appeal and the time
and manner in which any record on appeal shall be prepared and filed
and may prescribe forms for such proceedings. These procedures shall
require that the hearing shall be held within three court days of filing the
notice of appeal. The unemancipated minor shall be notified of the date,
time, and place of the hearing. Judgment shall be entered within one court
day of submission of the matter. The appellate court shall ensure that the
unemancipated minor’s identity be kept confidential and that all court
proceedings be sealed. No filing fee shall be required for filing an appeal.
Judgment on appeal shall be entered within one court day of submission
of the matter.
(k) The Judicial Council shall prescribe, by rule, the practice and
procedure for petitions for waiver of parental notification, hearings, and
entry of judgment as it deems necessary and may prescribe forms for such

146 | Text of Proposed Laws

proceedings. Each court shall provide annually to the Judicial Council, in
a manner to be prescribed by the Judicial Council to ensure confidentiality
of the unemancipated minors filing petitions, a report of the number of
petitions filed, the number of petitions granted under paragraph (1) or
(2) of subdivision (h), deemed granted under subdivision (i), denied
under paragraph (3) of subdivision (h), and granted and denied under
subdivision (j), said reports to be publicly available unless the Judicial
Council determines that the data contained in individual reports should be
aggregated by county before being made available to the public in order to
preserve the confidentiality of the unemancipated minors filing petitions.
(l) The State Department of Health Services shall prescribe forms
for the reporting of abortions performed on unemancipated minors by
physicians. The report forms shall not identify the unemancipated minor or
her parent(s) or guardian by name or request other information by which
the unemancipated minor or her parent(s) or guardian might be identified.
The forms shall include the date of the procedure and the unemancipated
minor’s month and year of birth, the duration of the pregnancy, the type of
abortion procedure, the numbers of the unemancipated minor’s previous
abortions and deliveries if known, and the facility where the abortion
was performed. The forms shall also indicate whether the abortion was
performed after personal delivery of a notice, pursuant to subdivision
(c); or was an abortion performed after presumed delivery of a notice
by mail, pursuant to subdivision (d); or was an abortion performed
after receiving a waiver of notice, pursuant to subdivision (e); or was an
abortion performed without notice, pursuant to subdivision (f); or was an
abortion performed after receiving any judicial waiver of notice, pursuant
to subdivision (h), (i), or (j).
(m) The physician who performs an abortion on an unemancipated
minor shall within one month file a dated and signed report concerning it
with the State Department of Health Services on forms prescribed pursuant
to subdivision (l). The identity of the physician shall be kept confidential and
shall not be subject to disclosure under the California Public Records Act.
(n) The State Department of Health Services shall compile an annual
statistical report from the information specified in subdivision (l). The annual
report shall not include the identity of any physician who filed a report as
required by subdivision (m). The compilation shall include statistical
information on the numbers of abortions by month and by county where
performed, the minors’ ages, the duration of the pregnancies, the types of
abortion procedures, the numbers of prior abortions or deliveries where
known, and the numbers of abortions performed after personal delivery of
a notice, pursuant to subdivision (c); the numbers of abortions performed
after presumed delivery of a notice by mail, pursuant to subdivision (d);
the numbers of abortions performed after a waiver of notice, pursuant to
subdivision (e); the numbers of abortions performed without notice, pursuant
to subdivision (f); and the numbers of abortions performed after any judicial
waivers, pursuant to subdivision (h), (i), or (j). The annual statistical report
shall be made available to county public health officials, Members of the
Legislature, the Governor, and the public.
(o) Any person who performs an abortion on an unemancipated minor
and in so doing knowingly or negligently fails to comply with the provisions
of this section shall be liable for damages in a civil action brought by the
unemancipated minor, her legal representative, or by a parent or guardian
wrongfully denied notification. A person shall not be liable under this
section if the person establishes by written evidence that the person relied
upon evidence sufficient to convince a careful and prudent person that the
representations of the unemancipated minor or other persons regarding
information necessary to comply with this section were bona fide and true.
At any time prior to the rendering of a final judgment in an action brought
under this subdivision, the parent or guardian may elect to recover, in lieu
of actual damages, an award of statutory damages in the amount of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000). In addition to any damages awarded under
this subdivision, the plaintiff shall be entitled to an award of reasonable
attorney fees. Nothing in this section shall abrogate, limit, or restrict the
common law rights of parents or guardians, or any right to relief under
any theory of liability that any person or any state or local agency may
have under any statute or common law for any injury or damage, including
any legal, equitable, or administrative remedy under federal or state law,
against any party, with respect to injury to an unemancipated minor from
an abortion.
(p) Other than an unemancipated minor who is the patient of a
physician, or other than the physician or the physician’s agent, any person
who knowingly provides false information to a physician or a physician’s

(PROPOSITION 85 CONTINUED)

text of proposed laws

agent for the purpose of inducing the physician or the physician’s agent to
believe that pursuant to this section notice has been or will be delivered,
or that a waiver of notice has been obtained, or that an unemancipated
minor patient is not an unemancipated minor, is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000).
(q) Notwithstanding any notices delivered pursuant to subdivision
(c) or (d) or waivers received pursuant to subdivision (e), (h), (i), or (j),
except where the particular circumstances of a medical emergency or her
own mental incapacity precludes obtaining her consent, a physician shall
not perform or induce an abortion upon an unemancipated minor except
with the consent of the unemancipated minor herself.
(r) Notwithstanding any notices delivered pursuant to subdivision
(c) or (d) or waivers received pursuant to subdivision (e), (h), (i), or (j), an
unemancipated minor who is being coerced by any person through force,
threat of force, or threatened or actual deprivation of food or shelter to
consent to undergo an abortion may apply to the juvenile court for relief.
The court shall give the matter expedited consideration and grant such
relief as may be necessary to prevent such coercion.
(s) This section shall not take effect until 90 days after the election
in which it is approved. The Judicial Council shall, within these 90 days,
prescribe the rules, practices, and procedures and prepare and make
available any forms it may prescribe as provided in subdivision (k). The
State Department of Health Services shall, within these 90 days, prepare
and make available the forms prescribed in subdivisions (c), (e), and (l).
(t) If any one or more provision, subdivision, sentence, clause,
phrase or word of this section or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is found to be unconstitutional or invalid, the same is hereby
declared to be severable and the balance of this section shall remain
effective notwithstanding such unconstitutionality or invalidity. Each
provision, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this section
would have been approved by voters irrespective of the fact that any one
or more provision, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase, or word might be
declared unconstitutional or invalid.
(u) Except for the rights, duties, privileges, conditions, and limitations
specifically provided for in this section, nothing in this section shall be
construed to grant, secure, or deny any other rights, duties, privileges,
conditions, and limitations relating to abortion or the funding thereof.

burden on our state’s health care system continue.
(e) The deterioration of the state’s hospital emergency services
network has left many communities unable to adequately cope with the
normal flow of emergency services. This emergency services crisis
imposes a significant burden on our community clinics and keeps them
from fulfilling their important health care function for low income children
and adults.
(f) Funds which could be used to provide pioneering research into
the prevention and treatment of chronic diseases, and health insurance
for our most vulnerable children, are increasingly diverted to address the
health care crisis caused, in part, by tobacco-related illnesses.
(g) Almost 80% of adult smokers become addicted to tobacco before
age 18. Increasing the cost of cigarettes and other tobacco products and
providing a comprehensive tobacco control program have proven to be
two of the most effective ways to reduce smoking among youth and the
associated health problems and economic costs.
(h) The establishment of programs designed to (1) reduce the
consumption of tobacco in the fi rst instance, (2) fund research, early
detection and treatment of chronic diseases, and (3) preserve access to
emergency hospital services performed by well-trained doctors and nurses,
is vital to the public’s interest.
SEC. 2. Statement of Purpose
(a) The people of California hereby increase the tax on tobacco to
reduce the economic costs of tobacco use in California and to provide
supplemental funding to:
(1) promote medical research into chronic diseases, particularly
cancer;
(2) reduce the impact of chronic diseases through prevention, early
detection, treatment and comprehensive health insurance; and
(3) improve access to and delivery of health care, particularly
emergency health services.
SEC. 3. Tobacco Tax
Article 4 (commencing with Section 30132) is added to Chapter 2 of
Part 13 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, to read:

PROPOSITION 86

30132. The Tobacco Tax of 2006 Trust Fund (“Tobacco Trust
Fund”) is hereby created in the State Treasury. The fund shall consist of
all revenues deposited therein pursuant to this Article, including interest
and investment income. Moneys deposited into the Tobacco Tax of 2006
Trust Fund shall be allocated and are continuously appropriated for the
exclusive purpose of funding the programs and services in Section 30132.3
and shall be available for expenditure without regard to fiscal years.
30132.1. (a) In addition to the taxes imposed upon the distribution
of cigarettes by Article 1 (commencing with Section 30101) and Article
2 (commencing with Section 30121) and Article 3 (commencing with
Section 30131) and any other taxes in this Chapter, there shall be imposed
an additional tax upon every distributor of cigarettes at the rate of one
hundred thirty mills ($0.130) for each cigarette distributed.
(b) For purposes of this Article, the term “cigarette” has the same
meaning as in Section 30003, as it read on January 1, 2005.
(c) The tax imposed by this Section, and the resulting increase in the
tax on tobacco products required by subdivision (b) of Section 30123, shall
be imposed on every cigarette and on all tobacco products in the possession
or under the control of every dealer, wholesaler, and distributor on and
after 12:01 a.m. on January 1, 2007, pursuant to rules and regulations
promulgated by the State Board of Equalization.
30132.2. The State Board of Equalization shall determine
within one year of the passage of this Act, and annually thereafter, the
effect that the additional tax imposed on cigarettes by this Act, and the
resulting increase in the tax on tobacco products required by subdivision
(b) of Section 30123, have on the consumption of cigarettes and tobacco
products in this state. To the extent that a decrease in consumption is
determined by the State Board of Equalization to be a direct result of the
additional tax imposed by this Act, or the resulting increase in the tax
on tobacco products required by subdivision (b) of Section 30123, the
State Board of Equalization shall determine the fiscal effect the decrease
in consumption has on the California Children and Families Trust Fund
created by Proposition 10 (1998). Funds shall be transferred from the

This initiative measure is submitted to the people in accordance with
the provisions of Section 8 of Article II of the California Constitution.
This initiative measure adds sections to the California Constitution
and the Health and Safety Code, the Insurance Code, the Revenue and
Taxation Code, and the Welfare and Institutions Code; therefore, new
provisions proposed to be added are printed in italic type to indicate that
they are new.
PROPOSED LAW
THE TOBACCO TAX ACT OF 2006
SECTION 1. Statement of Findings
(a) Cigarette smoking and other uses of tobacco are leading causes
of many serious health problems, including cancer, heart disease and
respiratory diseases. The treatment of tobacco-related diseases imposes
a significant burden upon California’s already overstressed health care
system. Prior efforts to curb the use of tobacco have not sufficiently eased
the health care burden on the taxpayers of California.
(b) Tobacco use costs Californians billions of dollars a year in
medical expenses and lost productivity.
(c) Currently, the state imposes a tax on cigarettes and tobacco
products. Funds from that tax are used in part by the state to fund programs
to offset the adverse health consequences of tobacco use. The tobacco tax
is an appropriate source to fund prevention, research and treatment of
chronic diseases, including improved access to health care for children
and adults.
(d) The tax on tobacco products in California has not been raised
since 1998. As a consequence, the total tax levied on tobacco products
is much less than in many other states. Yet the health consequences to
our citizens, particularly children and young adults, and the corresponding

Article 4.

The Tobacco Tax of 2006 Trust Fund

Text of Proposed Laws | 147

85
86

text of proposed laws

86

Tobacco Trust Fund to the California Children and Families Trust Fund as
necessary to offset the revenue decrease directly resulting from imposition
of the additional tax imposed by this Act, and the resulting increase in the
tax on tobacco products required by subdivision (b) of Section 30123. The
reimbursements shall occur, and at such times, as determined necessary to
further the intent of this Section.
30132.3. Except for payments of refunds made pursuant to Article 1
(commencing with Section 30361) of Chapter 6, reimbursement of the
State Board of Equalization for expenses incurred in the administration
and collection of the tax imposed by Section 30132.1 and the resulting
increase in the tax on tobacco products required by subdivision (b) of
Section 30123, and transfers of funds in accordance with Section 30132.2,
all moneys raised pursuant to the tax imposed by Section 30132.1, and the
resulting increase in the tax on tobacco products required by subdivision
(b) of Section 30123, shall be deposited in the Tobacco Trust Fund. Moneys
shall be allocated and appropriated from the Tobacco Trust Fund, as
follows:
(a) To the Health and Disease Research Account, which is hereby
created, five percent (5%), allocated to the following Sub-Accounts for the
purposes stated therein:
(1) Thirty-four percent (34%) shall be deposited in a Tobacco Control
Research Sub-Account, which is hereby created. All funds in the Tobacco
Control Research Sub-Account shall be continuously appropriated to
the University of California to be used solely to supplement the Tobacco
Related Disease Research Program described in Article 2 (commencing
with Section 104500) of Chapter 1 of Part 3 of Division 103 of the Health
and Safety Code. The research funded by the Tobacco-Related Disease
Research Program with these supplementary funds shall include, but not
be limited to:
(A) Research to improve the effectiveness of tobacco control efforts
in California, including programs and strategies for governmental and
other organizations to reduce tobacco use and exposure to secondhand
smoke; and
(B) Research on the prevention, causes, and treatment of tobaccorelated diseases, including, but not limited to coronary heart disease,
cerebrovascular disease, chronic obstructive lung disease, and cancer.
(2) Fourteen and one-half percent (14.50%) shall be deposited in
a Cancer Registry Sub-Account, which is hereby created. All funds in
the Cancer Registry Sub-Account shall be continuously appropriated to
the State Department of Health Services to be used solely for a statewide
population-based cancer surveillance system as provided for in Chapter 2
(commencing with Section 103875) of Part 2 of Division 102 of the Health
and Safety Code.
(3) Twenty-five and three-fourths percent (25.75%) shall be deposited
in a Breast Cancer Research Sub-Account, which is hereby created. All
funds in the Breast Cancer Research Sub-Account shall be continuously
appropriated to the University of California to be used solely for the Breast
Cancer Research Program provided for in Article 1 (commencing with
Section 104145) of Chapter 2 of Part 1 of Division 103 of the Health and
Safety Code.
(4) Fourteen and three-fourths percent (14.75%) shall be deposited
in a Cancer Research Sub-Account, which is hereby created. All funds in
the Cancer Research Sub-Account shall be continuously appropriated
to the State Department of Health Services to be used solely for the
Cancer Research Program described in Section 104181 of the Health and
Safety Code, with a focus on applied research, which includes but is not
limited to, research that is geared towards the accelerated transfer of
recent laboratory and clinical technologic advances into primary care,
public health and community settings so that the majority of California’s
population may benefit. This research should be focused on converting
recent discoveries into interventions and technologies, proving that they
work, and learning how best to apply them.
(5) Eleven percent (11%) shall be deposited in the Lung Cancer
and Lung Disease Research Sub-Account, which is hereby created. All
funds deposited in the Lung Cancer and Lung Disease Research SubAccount shall be continuously appropriated to the University of California
to be used solely to provide research grants to develop and advance
the understanding, causes, techniques, and modalities effective in the
prevention, care, treatment, and cure of lung disease. For purposes of this
Section, the lung disease research areas shall include, but not be limited
to lung cancer, asthma, tuberculosis, and chronic obstructive pulmonary

148 | Text of Proposed Laws

disease, which includes chronic bronchitis and emphysema.
(b) To the Health Maintenance and Disease Prevention Account,
which is hereby created, forty-two and one-fourth of one percent (42.25%),
allocated to the following Sub-Accounts for the purposes stated therein:
(1) Six and three-fourths percent (6.75%) shall be deposited in the
Tobacco Control Media Campaign Sub-Account, which is hereby created.
All funds in the Tobacco Control Media Campaign Sub-Account shall be
continuously appropriated to the State Department of Health Services to
be used solely for media advertisements and public relations programs to
prevent and reduce the use of tobacco products as described in paragraph
(1) of subdivision (e) of Section 104375 of the Health and Safety Code.
(2) Four and one-half percent (4.50%) shall be deposited in a
Tobacco Control Competitive Grants Sub-Account, which is hereby
created. All funds in the Tobacco Control Competitive Grants Sub-Account
shall be continuously appropriated to the State Department of Health
Services to be used solely for the competitive grants program directed at
the prevention of tobacco-related diseases as described in Section 104385
of the Health and Safety Code.
(3) Four and one-fourths percent (4.25%) shall be deposited in a
Local Health Department Tobacco Prevention Sub-Account, which is hereby
created. All funds in the Local Health Department Tobacco Prevention
Sub-Account shall be continuously appropriated to the State Department
of Health Services to be used solely for local-health-department-based
programs to prevent tobacco use as described in Section 104400 of the
Health and Safety Code. Notwithstanding Section 104380 of the Health and
Safety Code, funds from the Local Health Department Tobacco Prevention
Sub-Account shall be appropriated to local lead agencies based on each
county’s proportion of the statewide population.
(4) One-half percent (0.50%) shall be deposited in a Tobacco Control
Evaluation Sub-Account, which is hereby created. All funds in the Tobacco
Control Evaluation Sub-Account shall be continuously appropriated to
the State Department of Health Services to be used solely for evaluation
of tobacco control programs as required by subdivisions (b) and (c) of
Section 104375 of the Health and Safety Code.
(5) Three and one-half percent (3.50%) shall be deposited in a
Tobacco Education Sub-Account, which is hereby created. All funds in the
Tobacco Education Sub-Account shall be continuously appropriated to the
State Department of Education to be used solely for programs to prevent
or reduce the use of tobacco products as described in Section 104420 of
the Health and Safety Code. Any program receiving funds pursuant to
this section must participate in program evaluations conducted by the
State Department of Health Services pursuant to Article 1 (commencing
with Section 104350) of Chapter 1 of Part 3 of Division 103 of the Health
and Safety Code. At least two percent (2%) of the money in the Tobacco
Education Sub-Account shall be used solely for administration of the
department’s tobacco prevention education program as described in
Sections 104420 and 104425 of the Health and Safety Code.
(6) Two and one-fourths percent (2.25%) shall be deposited in the
Tobacco Control Enforcement Sub-Account, which is hereby created. All
funds in the Tobacco Control Enforcement Sub-Account shall be used solely
for programs to enforce tobacco-related statutes and policies, to enforce
legal settlement provisions, and to conduct law enforcement training and
technical assistance activities, and shall be appropriated as follows:
(A) Fifty percent (50%) of the funds in the Tobacco Control
Enforcement Sub-Account is continuously appropriated to the State
Department of Health Services to be used to support programs, including,
but not limited to: providing grants to local law enforcement agencies to
provide training and funding for the enforcement of state and local tobaccorelated laws and policies, including, but not limited to the illegal sales of
tobacco to minors, tobacco retailer licensing and exposure to secondhand
smoke; and increasing investigative activities, compliance checks and
other appropriate activities to reduce illegal sales of tobacco products to
minors under the Stop Tobacco Access to Kids Enforcement (STAKE) Act,
pursuant to Section 22952 of the Business and Professions Code.
(B) Twenty-five percent (25%) of the funds in the Tobacco Control
Enforcement Sub-Account is continuously appropriated to the California
Office of the Attorney General to be used for activities including, but
not limited to: enforcing laws that regulate the distribution and sale of
cigarettes and other tobacco products, such as laws that prohibit cigarette
smuggling, counterfeiting, selling untaxed tobacco, selling tobacco without
a proper license and selling tobacco to minors; enforcing tobacco-related

(PROPOSITION 86 CONTINUED)

laws, court judgments, and settlements, such as the Tobacco Master
Settlement Agreement and the Smokeless Tobacco Master Settlement
Agreement, entered into on November 23, 1998, by the State of California
and leading United States tobacco product manufacturers, including
tracking tobacco industry advertising, marketing, and promotional
activities in California, and bringing actions against violators; and
assisting local law enforcement agencies in the enforcement of tobaccorelated statutes and local ordinances through technical assistance and
training activities.
(C) Twenty-five percent (25%) of the funds in the Tobacco Control
Enforcement Sub-Account is continuously appropriated to the State Board
of Equalization to be used to enforce laws that regulate the distribution and
sale of cigarettes and other tobacco products, such as laws that prohibit
cigarette smuggling, counterfeiting, selling untaxed tobacco, and selling
tobacco without a proper license.
(7) Eight percent (8%) shall be deposited in a Breast and Cervical
Cancer Early Detection Sub-Account, which is hereby created. All funds
in the Breast and Cervical Cancer Early Detection Sub-Account shall be
continuously appropriated to the State Department of Health Services
to be used solely for breast and cervical cancer prevention and early
detection services that result in the reduction of breast and cervical cancer
morbidity and mortality in California. These early detection services
shall be part of a program that includes a significant quality assurance
and improvement component, including patient and provider education,
community outreach, and program evaluation.
(8) Eight and one-half percent (8.50%) shall be deposited in a Heart
Disease and Stroke Prevention Sub-Account, which is hereby created. All
funds in the Heart Disease and Stroke Prevention Sub-Account shall be
continuously appropriated to the State Department of Health Services
to be used solely for the California Heart Disease and Stroke Prevention
Program provided for in Section 104142 of the Health and Safety Code.
The intent of this program is to reduce the risk, disability and death from
heart disease and stroke.
(9) Seven and three-fourths percent (7.75%) shall be deposited in
an Obesity Prevention, Nutrition and Physical Activity Promotion SubAccount, which is hereby created. All funds in the Obesity Prevention,
Nutrition and Physical Activity Promotion Sub-Account shall be
appropriated as follows:
(A) Seventy percent (70%) shall be continuously appropriated to the
State Department of Health Services to support programs and activities
to be used solely to prevent obesity, diabetes, and chronic diseases
through the promotion of community norm change, healthy eating, and
physical activity. The department shall design, develop and enhance a
comprehensive program that includes, but need not be limited to: media
advertisements and public relations programs; competitive grants to
community based organizations and agencies; grants to local health
departments; research and evaluation of program effectiveness; and those
provisions contained in Section 104650 of the Health and Safety Code.
(B) Thirty percent (30%) shall be continuously appropriated to
the State Department of Education to be used solely to design, develop,
and support programs and activities to prevent obesity, diabetes and
chronic diseases through the promotion of, and access to, healthy eating
and physical activity for children and their families within the context of
coordinated school health. Such programs and activities shall include
but need not be limited to, promotion of, and access to, fruits, vegetables
and other healthy foods; promotion of moderate and vigorous physical
activity; promotion of health education and physical education; research,
surveillance and evaluation of program effectiveness; professional
development for teachers and other appropriate staff in health education
and physical education; and monitoring local educational agencies’
compliance with state laws for nutrition and physical education.
(C) The State Department of Health Services, in consultation with
the State Department of Education, shall establish an Oversight Committee
composed of 13 members selected for their expertise in nutrition, physical
activity and education, and related disciplines pertinent to the purposes
of this Sub-Account. Membership shall include, but need not be limited
to, representation from the following: health and education organizations,
public health and local education agencies, advocacy groups, and
healthcare professionals and organizations.
The Oversight Committee shall advise the State Department of Health
Services and the State Department of Education with respect to policy

text of proposed laws
development and evaluation and provide guidance on strategic priorities,
coordination, and collaboration among state agencies with regard to the
programs funded by the Obesity Prevention and Nutrition and Physical
Activity Promotion Sub-Account.
(10) Four and one-fourths percent (4.25%) shall be deposited in an
Asthma Prevention and Control Sub-Account, which is hereby created. All
funds in the Asthma Prevention and Control Sub-Account shall be used
solely to support asthma assessment, community intervention strategies,
training and technical assistance, surveillance, evaluation of asthma
prevention and control activities, translational research to implement
effective interventions, and school-based asthma education, training and
coordination activities. These funds shall be appropriated as follows:
(A) Sixty percent (60%) of the funds in the Asthma Prevention and
Control Sub-Account is continuously appropriated to the State Department
of Health Services to fund programs and services including, but not limited
to those described in Chapter 6.5 (commencing with Section 104316) of
Part 1 of Division 103 of the Health and Safety Code, including community
childhood asthma programs within the California Asthma Public Health
Initiative and asthma surveillance within the Environmental Health
Investigations Branch, and to support media advertisements, public
relations and other public education activities. Areas in the state that have
the highest asthma prevalence, and areas with low socioeconomic status
populations shall receive priority consideration in the expenditure of these
funds.
(B) Forty percent (40%) of the funds in the Asthma Prevention and
Control Sub-Account is continuously appropriated to the State Department
of Education to improve the management of asthma within the school
setting. Funds shall be for activities and programs, including, but not
limited to: statewide coordination of asthma programs and services, the
development or purchase and dissemination of educational and training
materials, delivery of asthma education and training to school personnel,
and the reduction of asthma triggers in the indoor and outdoor school
environments. Schools in areas of the state that have the highest asthma
prevalence, schools serving low socioeconomic status students and school
districts that do not have school nurses shall receive priority consideration
in the expenditure of these funds.
(11) Four and one-fourths percent (4.25%) shall be deposited in a
Colorectal Cancer Sub-Account, which is hereby created. All funds in the
Colorectal Cancer Sub-Account shall be continuously appropriated to the
State Department of Health Services to be used solely for the Colorectal
Cancer Prevention, Detection and Treatment Program described in
Article 2.7 (commencing with Section 104195) of Chapter 2 of Part 1 of
Division 103 of the Health and Safety Code. The intent of this program is
to reduce the incidence, morbidity, and mortality due to colorectal cancer.
This program shall include various public health components, including
a significant quality assurance and improvement component, patient and
provider education, community outreach, and program evaluation. No
less than forty percent (40%) of the funds for this program shall be used
for those non-clinical public health components.
(12) Forty-five and one-half percent (45.50%) of the Fund shall be
deposited in the California Healthy Kids Sub-Account, which is hereby
created to ensure that every child in California is eligible for comprehensive,
affordable health insurance and has access to needed health care. All
moneys in the California Healthy Kids Sub-Account shall be continuously
appropriated to the California Health and Human Services Agency only
for implementation by the State Department of Health Services and the
Managed Risk Medical Insurance Board of Chapter 17 (commencing with
Section 12693.99) of Part 6.2 of Division 2 of the Insurance Code pursuant
to the provisions and restrictions thereof. No less than ninety percent
(90%) of the funds appropriated from this Sub-Account shall be used for
implementation of Section 12693.99 of the Insurance Code. No more than
ten percent (10%) of the funds appropriated from this Sub-Account shall
be used for implementation of Section 12693.991 of the Insurance Code.
(c) To the Health Treatment and Services Account, which is hereby
created, fi fty-two and three-fourths percent (52.75%), allocated to the
following Sub-Accounts for the purposes stated therein:
(1) One and three-fourths percent (1.75%) shall be deposited in a
Tobacco Cessation Services Sub-Account, which is hereby created. All
funds in the Tobacco Cessation Services Sub-Account shall be continuously
appropriated to the State Department of Health Services to be used solely
to provide tobacco cessation programs and services to assist adult and

Text of Proposed Laws | 149

86

text of proposed laws

86

minor tobacco users to quit tobacco. It is the intent of this Act that this
appropriation supports programs and services including, but not limited
to counseling, referral and support services, pharmaceutical tobacco
cessation products, and training and technical assistance activities.
(2) One and three-fourths percent (1.75%) shall be deposited in a
Prostate Cancer Treatment Sub-Account, which is hereby created. All
funds in the Prostate Cancer Treatment Sub-Account shall be continuously
appropriated to the State Department of Health Services to be used solely
to provide for prostate cancer prevention and treatment for low income
and uninsured men.
(3) Five and three-fourths percent (5.75%) shall be deposited in the
Community Clinics Uninsured Sub-Account, which is hereby created to
fund nonprofit clinic corporations providing vital health care service
to the uninsured in accordance with Article 6 (commencing with
Section 1246) of Chapter 1 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code.
All funds in the Community Clinics Uninsured Sub-Account shall be
continuously appropriated to the State Department of Health Services
solely for implementation of Article 6 (commencing with Section 1246)
of Chapter 1 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code.
(4)(i) Five and three-fourths percent (5.75%) to the Emergency Care
Physician Services Sub-Account, which is hereby created. All funds in the
Emergency Care Physician Services Sub-Account shall be continuously
appropriated to the State Department of Health Services to be administered
and allocated for distribution through the California Healthcare for
Indigents Program (CHIP), Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 16940)
of Part 4.7 of Division 9 of the Welfare and Institutions Code.
(ii) Three-fourths percent (0.75%) to the Rural Emergency Care
Physician Services Sub-Account, which is hereby created. All funds in
the Rural Emergency Care Physician Services Sub-Account shall be
continuously appropriated to the State Department of Health Services to
be administered and allocated for distribution through the Rural Health
Services Program (RHSP), Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 16930)
of Part 4.7 of Division 9 of the Welfare and Institutions Code.
(iii) Funds allocated to the Emergency Care Physician Services
Sub-Account and Rural Emergency Care Physician Services Sub-Account
shall be used only for reimbursement of physicians for losses incurred
in providing uncompensated emergency services in general acute care
hospitals providing basic, comprehensive, or standby emergency services,
as defined in Section 16953 of the Welfare and Institutions Code. Funds
shall be transferred annually by the Department to the Physician Services
Accounts in the county Emergency Medical Services Fund established
pursuant to Sections 16951 and 16952 of the Welfare and Institutions
Code, and shall be paid only to physicians who directly provide emergency
medical services to patients, based on claims submitted or a subsequent
reconciliation of claims. Payments shall be made as provided in Sections
16951 to 16959, inclusive, of the Welfare and Institutions Code, and
payments shall be made on an equitable basis, without preference to
any particular physician or group of physicians. Funds allocated by
this Section to counties that have not established an Emergency Medical
Services Fund pursuant to Section 16951 shall be deposited into the
Department of Health Services EMSA Contract Back Program, to be used
only for the reimbursement of uncompensated emergency services, as
defined in Section 16953, and payments made, based on claims submitted,
in accordance with the procedures and policies established in Sections
16952 through 16959 of the Welfare and Institutions Code.
(5) Three-fourths percent (0.75%) to the Medically Underserved
Account created by Business and Professions Code section 2154.4.
All funds in the Medically Underserved Account shall be continuously
appropriated to the Medical Board of California to promote the practice
of medicine in areas of the state underserved by physicians to lowincome patients pursuant to the Steven M. Thompson Physician Corps
Loan Repayment Program set forth in Article 7.7 (commencing with
Section 2154) of Chapter 5 of Division 2 of the Business and Professions
Code.
(6) Nine percent (9%) to the Nursing Workforce Education SubAccount, which is hereby created. All funds in the Nursing Workforce
Education Sub-Account shall be continuously appropriated to the Office
of Statewide Health Planning and Development to be used solely to
expand nursing education opportunities and capabilities to meet nursing
workforce demands pursuant to Section 128225.5 of the Health and Safety
Code. Expenditures from the Nursing Workforce Education Sub-Account
shall be made according to the following formula:

150 | Text of Proposed Laws

(A) Eighty-six percent (86%) shall be used to support the expansion
of California Board of Registered Nursing (“BRN”) -approved registered
nurse education pre-licensure programs in the California Community
Colleges, the California State University and the University of California,
and to support the expansion of graduate nursing education programs
(MSN, DNSc/Ph.D.), and to support California Advanced Practice
Registered Nurse Programs at the California State University and the
University of California.
(B) Fourteen percent (14%) shall be used to support the expansion
of BRN-approved privately operated registered nurse education prelicensure programs, the expansion of privately operated graduate nursing
education programs (MSN, DNSc/Ph.D.), and to support the expansion
of privately operated California Advanced Practice Registered Nurse
Programs.
(7) Seventy-four and one-half percent (74.50%) to the Emergency
and Trauma Hospital Services Sub-Account, which is hereby created. All
funds in the Emergency and Trauma Hospital Services Sub-Account
shall be continuously appropriated to the State Department of Health
Services to further the provision of hospital and medical services to
emergency patients in California pursuant to Chapter 4.5 (commencing
with Section 1797.300) of Division 2.5 of the Health and Safety Code.
30132.4. All moneys allocated to and deposited in the specific
Accounts and Sub-Accounts of the Tobacco Tax of 2006 Trust Fund shall
be expended as set forth pursuant to the requirements specific to each
Account or Sub-Account as set forth in Section 30132.3. Notwithstanding
Government Code Section 13340, any moneys allocated and appropriated
to any of the Accounts or Sub-Accounts of the Tobacco Tax of 2006 Trust
Fund that are not encumbered or expended within any applicable period
prescribed by law shall, together with the accrued interest on the amount,
revert to and remain in the same Account or Sub-Account for encumbrance
and expenditure for the next fiscal period.
30132.5. (a) All moneys raised pursuant to the tax imposed by
Section 30132.1, and all moneys raised by the resulting increase in the tax
on tobacco products required by subdivision (b) of Section 30123, shall be
appropriated and expended only for the purposes expressed in this Act.
Funds appropriated pursuant to this Act shall be used only to supplement
existing levels of service and not to supplant funding for existing levels
of service. Funds may be used to match available state, federal, or local
funds. Except as specified in subdivision (b), no moneys in the Tobacco
Tax of 2006 Trust Fund shall be used to supplant state or local General
Fund money for any purpose, including back-filling state or local General
Fund obligations.
(b) In addition to the provisions of subdivision (a), all moneys
raised pursuant to the tax imposed by Section 30132.1, and all moneys
raised by the resulting increase in the tax on tobacco products required by
subdivision (b) of Section 30123, shall not supplant the following:
(1) Local funds used to secure state or federal matching funds for
any children’s health services, children’s health, or medical assistance
programs, including but not limited to, the following: (A) Healthy Families,
(B) Medi-Cal, whether full-scope or emergency or pregnancy-related care
only, and (C) the Child Health and Disability Prevention Program; but not
including funds generated by or expended from the California Children
and Families Trust Fund (Division 108 (commencing with Section 130100)
of the Health and Safety Code) or from the County Health Initiative
Matching Fund (Part 6.4 (commencing with Section 12699.50) of Division
2 of the Insurance Code);
(2) State funds used to secure federal matching funds for any
children’s health services, children’s health, or medical assistance
programs, including but not limited to the following:
(A) Healthy Families,
(B) Medi-Cal, whether full-scope or emergency or pregnancyrelated care only, and
(C) The Child Health and Disability Prevention Program; or
(3) State or federal funds to continue or maintain the amount, duration,
scope and structure of benefits that existed as of September 30, 2005 for
any children’s health services, children’s health, or medical assistance
programs, including but not limited to the following:
(A) Healthy Families,
(B) Medi-Cal, whether full-scope or emergency or pregnancyrelated care only, and

(PROPOSITION 86 CONTINUED)

(C) The Child Health and Disability Prevention Program.
(c) It is the intent of the people of the State of California that the
Tobacco Tax Act of 2006 shall, in accordance with the purposes and
intent of this Act, maximize, and not reduce, federal matching funds made
available to the State for children’s health coverage under Title XIX and/or
Title XXI of the Social Security Act.
(d) No state or local government agency shall consider the revenue
supporting emergency services to hospitals provided by this Act in its
determination of the amount or rate of payment to hospitals on behalf
of patients who are government-sponsored or the responsibility of a
governmental agency or body.
30132.6. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, money
deposited in the Tobacco Tax of 2006 Trust Fund may not be loaned to,
or borrowed by, any other special fund or the General Fund, or a county
general fund or any other county fund, for any purpose other than those
authorized by the Tobacco Tax Act of 2006.
30132.7. Due to the necessity to rapidly and efficiently implement
the mandates of the Tobacco Tax Act of 2006, any contract made pursuant
to paragraphs (7) through (11) of subdivision (b), and paragraph
(2) of subdivision (c) of Section 30132.3, shall not be subject to Part 2
(commencing with Section 10100) of the Public Contract Code for the first
five full years after enactment.
30132.8. At least two percent (2%) of the money appropriated
to the State Department of Health Services pursuant to paragraphs (1)
through (4) and paragraph (6) of subdivision (b) of Section 30132.3, and
paragraph (1) of subdivision (c) of Section 30132.3, shall be used solely for
administration of the department’s tobacco control programs.
30132.9. Moneys in the Tobacco Tax of 2006 Trust Fund and any
Account or Sub-Account therein, may be used to maximize federal matching
funds, so long as all moneys are expended in a manner fully consistent with
the Tobacco Tax Act of 2006.
30132.10. To provide full public accountability concerning the uses
to which moneys in the Tobacco Tax of 2006 Trust Fund are put, and to
ensure full compliance with the Tobacco Tax Act of 2006:
(a) Beginning with the first full fiscal year after the adoption of the
Tobacco Tax Act of 2006, and annually thereafter, the State Department
of Health Services shall prepare a report describing all programs that
received Tobacco Tax of 2006 Trust Fund moneys in the previous fiscal
year, and describing in detail the uses to which fund moneys were put
during the previous fiscal year. This report shall be made available to the
public on the department’s web site, no later than March 31.
(b) All programs and departments receiving moneys from the
Tobacco Tax of 2006 Trust Fund are subject to audits by the Bureau of
State Audits.
(c) No more than five percent (5%) of the funds appropriated to any
Account or Sub-Account created by the Tobacco Tax Act of 2006 may be
used for administration, unless a lower amount is specified elsewhere in
this Act.
SEC. 4. Article 2.7 (commencing with Section 104195) is added to
Chapter 2 of Part 1 of Division 103 of the Health and Safety Code, to read:
Article 2.7.

Colorectal Cancer Prevention, Detection,
and Treatment

104195. The Colorectal Cancer Prevention, Detection, and
Treatment Program shall be established within the State Department of
Health Services.
104195.1. The program shall apply to both of the following groups:
(a) Uninsured and underinsured persons 50 years of age and older
with incomes at or below two hundred percent (200%) of the federal
poverty level.
(b) Uninsured and underinsured persons below 50 years of age
who are at high risk for colorectal cancer according to the most recently
published colorectal cancer screening guidelines of the U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force and who have incomes at or below two hundred
percent (200%) of the federal poverty level.
104195.2. Services provided under this Article shall include, but
are not limited to, all of the following:
(a) Screening of men and women for colorectal cancer as an early
detection health care measure, in accordance with the most recent cancer

text of proposed laws
screening guidelines of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
(b) After screening, medical referral of the screened person and
services necessary for a definitive diagnosis.
(c) If a positive diagnosis is made, then assistance and advocacy
shall be provided to help the person obtain necessary treatment.
(d) Necessary treatment in accordance with the most recent cancer
treatment guidelines of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network.
(e) Outreach and health education activities to ensure that uninsured
and underinsured persons are aware of, and appropriately utilize, the
services provided by the program.
104195.3. The department shall award one or more contracts to
provide colorectal cancer screening and treatment through private or
public nonprofit organizations, which may include, but shall not be limited
to, community-based organizations, local health care providers, and the
University of California medical centers.
SEC. 5. Heart Disease and Stroke Prevention Program
Section 104142 is added to Chapter 1 of Part 1 of Division 103 of the
Health and Safety Code, to read:
104142. The California Heart Disease and Stroke Prevention
Program (CHDSP) is hereby created in the State Department of Health
Services. The CHDSP program that is hereby created is consistent with
the existing CHDSP program within the department and shall not be
duplicated by another cardiovascular disease (CVD) program.
(a) The CHDSP program shall do, but is not limited to, all of the
following:
(1) Conduct programs to prevent and reduce risk factors for CVD
including, but not limited to, high blood pressure, as provided for in
Section 104100, and high cholesterol.
(2) Design, implement, and support programs to improve disease
treatment and management, including quality of care for CVD.
(3) Promote and support medical professional development for the
prevention and treatment of CVD.
(4) Collect, analyze, and publish data on CVD, which may include
the establishment of a heart disease and stroke registry to track the
incidence and prevalence of CVD.
(5) Guide the development of public health policies, including linkages
with appropriate state agencies, to improve health outcomes from CVD.
(6) Conduct a statewide public education campaign that focuses on the
incidence, signs, symptoms, and risk factor reduction strategies for CVD.
(b) The department shall consider, as a priority, the
recommendations of the Heart Disease and Stroke Prevention and
Treatment Task Force, as provided for in Section 104141.
(c) The department may authorize CVD research, including pilot
demonstration projects.
(d) Nothing in this section shall duplicate other programs in the
department.
SEC. 6. Chapter 17 (commencing with Section 12693.99) is added
to Part 6.2 of Division 2 of the Insurance Code, to read:

CHAPTER 17.

CHILDREN’S HEALTH

12693.99. (a) To ensure that every child in California is eligible
for comprehensive, affordable health insurance and has access to needed
health care, all children described in subdivision (b) shall be eligible for
the California Healthy Families Program (Part 6.2 (commencing with
Section 12693) of Division 2 of the Insurance Code (hereinafter “Healthy
Families”).
(b) All children under 19 years of age shall be eligible for the services
and benefits provided under this Chapter, notwithstanding paragraph (4)
of subdivision (a) of Section 12693.70 and Section 12693.73, if they meet
all of the following:
(1) Are in families with countable household income up to and
including 300 percent of the federal poverty level. In a family with annual
or monthly household income greater than 300 percent of the federal
poverty level, any income deduction that is applicable under Medi-Cal
shall be applied in determining annual or monthly household income
under this Section;
(2) Meet the state residency requirements of Healthy Families in

Text of Proposed Laws | 151

86

text of proposed laws

86

place as of September 30, 2005, as set forth in paragraph (5) of subdivision
(a) of Section 12693.70;
(3) Are in compliance with Sections 12693.71 and 12693.72; and
(4) Are not eligible for Healthy Families, or for full-scope Medi-Cal
(Chapter 7 (commencing at Section 14000) of Part 3 of Division 9 of the
Welfare and Institutions Code) without a share of cost, under the eligibility
rules in place as of September 30, 2005.
(c) The confidentiality and privacy protections set forth in Sections
10500 and 14100.2 of the Welfare and Institutions Code shall apply to all
children seeking, applying for or enrolled in Healthy Families.
(d) Families of children enrolled in Healthy Families through this
Chapter shall be required to contribute premiums equal to those required
of families of children enrolled in Healthy Families not through this
Chapter, subject to the following exceptions:
(1) Families of children up to and including 18 years of age who apply
for or are enrolled in Healthy Families and whose countable household
incomes are up to and including 100 percent of the federal poverty level
shall not be required to contribute any premiums; families of children up
to one year of age who apply for or are enrolled in Healthy Families and
whose countable household incomes are up to and including 200 percent of
the federal poverty level shall not be required to contribute any premiums;
and families of children up to and including six years of age who apply
for or are enrolled in Healthy Families and whose countable household
incomes are up to and including 133 percent of the federal poverty level
shall not be required to contribute any premiums.
(2) Families of children who are enrolled in Healthy Families whose
countable household incomes are greater than 250 percent and up to and
including 300 percent of the federal poverty level shall be required to
contribute premiums at 150 percent of the premiums required for children
who are enrolled in Healthy Families whose countable household incomes
are greater than 200 percent and up to and including 250 percent of the
federal poverty level. The same premium discounts available to children
enrolled in Healthy Families whose families have countable incomes of
200 through 250 percent of the federal poverty level shall be available on
the same terms to children enrolled in Healthy Families whose families’
countable incomes are greater than 250 percent of the federal poverty
level.
(e) Less restrictive Healthy Families eligibility requirements than
those established at subdivision (b) may be established by the Legislature
at any time before or after adoption of this Section. If the Legislature
adopts less restrictive eligibility criteria for Healthy Families at any time,
such a change shall supersede the eligibility requirements of this Section.
Nothing in this Section shall preclude a child from eligibility for Medi-Cal
or Healthy Families if less restrictive eligibility criteria are enacted. For
purposes of this subdivision, requirements or criteria are considered to
be “less restrictive” if, under such requirements or criteria, additional
individuals may be eligible for medical assistance and no individuals who
are otherwise eligible are made ineligible for such assistance.
12693.991. (a) The Managed Risk Medical Insurance Board and
the State Department of Health Services (hereinafter “administering
agencies”) shall continue to administer the Healthy Families and Medi-Cal
programs, respectively, for all eligible children. The administering agencies
shall coordinate their respective administrations of each program in a
cost-effective, coordinated and seamless manner with respect to children
seeking, applying for or enrolled in Medi-Cal or Healthy Families. Both
administering agencies shall coordinate enrollment, renewal, eligibility,
and outreach, and shall assign clear lines of responsibility for all associated
agency activities with enforceable accountability. Implementation of duties
and responsibilities that require the participation of both agencies shall be
done jointly, as coordinated between them by agreement.
(b) The administering agencies, in consultation with the Healthy
Kids Oversight and Accountability Commission, shall design and
implement streamlined application, enrollment and retention procedures
and mechanisms for all benefits available under Healthy Families
and Medi-Cal. From the child’s perspective there shall appear to be
a single program, though the details are handled by two programs and
administering agencies. The administering agencies shall implement
strategies including at least the following to ensure that all children who
are eligible for Healthy Families or Medi-Cal under the eligibility rules in
place on September 30, 2005, and all children who are eligible for Healthy
Families under this Chapter, receive health insurance:

152 | Text of Proposed Laws

(1) Simplify paperwork requirements for families to enroll their
children and retain coverage as long as they remain eligible by requesting
documentation and verifying information only to the extent required under
federal law.
(2) Expedite and streamline enrollment by offering enrollment,
which may be known as “express lane” or “gateway” enrollment, through
entry points such as the National School Lunch Program, the California
Supplemental Special Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and Children,
the Food Stamp Program, and the Child Health and Disability Prevention
Program or similar programs; by utilizing the enrollment information
provided by families to these other programs, with families’ consent and
ensuring confidentiality pursuant to subdivision (c) of Section 12693.99
for all children seeking, applying for, and enrolled in Healthy Families or
Medi-Cal; and by implementing an electronic gateway system to process
that enrollment.
(3) Develop a plan to ensure that eligible, enrolled children do not
experience a gap in benefits and to ensure continuity of medical care for
children when renewing or transferring between Medi-Cal and Healthy
Families, or from a local children’s health insurance program (hereinafter
“local CHI”). The plan shall include simplifying renewal forms and
renewal and transition processes.
(4) Facilitate outreach and education to current and potential
beneficiaries, applicants, health care providers, and insurers.
(5) In coordination with the Healthy Kids Oversight and
Accountability Commission, and while preserving confidentiality in
accordance with subdivision (c) of Section 12693.99, undertake a pilot
research demonstration project to test effective strategies, and gather data
about the impact of specific efforts, to increase coverage for uninsured
children in families with incomes above 300 percent of the federal poverty
level; and recommend to the Legislature strategies for increasing coverage
for this population based upon the pilot research demonstration project
results.
(6) In coordination with the Healthy Kids Oversight and
Accountability Commission, design and implement a process for ensuring
a smooth transition for local CHI enrollees to Healthy Families. The
transition shall provide that any child who applies for and is determined
eligible for Healthy Families pursuant to this Chapter, and who is enrolled
in a local CHI both as of enactment of this Chapter and as of his or her
Healthy Families eligibility determination, shall be automatically rolled
over into his or her existing local CHI health plan under Healthy Families,
if the health plan is a participating plan in Healthy Families. For good
cause or upon the child’s next annual renewal, a child may switch plans
or otherwise remain in his or her existing plan. Nothing in this paragraph
is intended to delay immediate implementation of this Chapter, including
eligibility for Healthy Families.
(7) Maximize federal matching funds available for eligible children’s
health insurance under Medi-Cal and Healthy Families and implement
strategies that coordinate and integrate existing children’s health insurance
programs to maximize available federal and state matching funds, such as
matching funds available for emergency or pregnancy-related Medi-Cal
benefits, for all eligible children.
(8) Take any additional steps necessary to ensure that from a child’s
perspective, Medi-Cal and Healthy Families operate as a single program.
(c) The Healthy Kids Oversight and Accountability Commission
is hereby established to guide the implementation and administration of
this Chapter; advise the administering agencies on how best to provide
affordable health insurance for all children; review financial audits of the
children’s Medi-Cal and Healthy Families programs by the Bureau of State
Audits; and identify inefficient practices or waste in the administration
or operation of Healthy Families and Medi-Cal and direct anticipated
savings back into providing health insurance for more children.
(1) The Commission shall consist of 15 members with expertise in
children’s health, health insurance and health insurance programs, and
shall include representatives from the following categories:
(A) Consumers;
(B) Consumer advocates, including representatives of specific child
populations;
(C) Health care providers, including physicians and public
hospitals;
(D) Health plans, including local CHIs; and

(PROPOSITION 86 CONTINUED)

(E) Other stakeholders, including but not limited to schools, business
and organized labor, and county agencies.
(2) The Speaker of the Assembly, the Senate President Pro Tempore,
and the Governor shall each appoint five commissioners such that each
appoints one commissioner from each of the five categories.
(3) Members shall serve without compensation, but shall be
reimbursed for all actual and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties.
(4) The term of each member shall be three years, to be staggered so
that approximately one-third of the appointments expire in each year.
(5) In carrying out its duties and responsibilities, the Commission
may do all of the following:
(A) Meet at least once each quarter at any time and location
convenient to the public as it may deem appropriate. All meetings of the
Commission shall be open to the public.
(B) Establish technical advisory committees such as a committee of
parents and guardians.
(C) Advise the Governor and the Legislature regarding actions the
state may take to improve access to, enrollment in, retention of, and use of
health coverage for children and their families.
(D) Recommend strategies to increase the efficiency of MediCal and Healthy Families, reduce paperwork requirements for benefit
administration, and implement electronic gateways and other “express
lanes” for increasing enrollment.
(E) Recommend strategies for transitioning children among and
between local CHIs, Medi-Cal and Healthy Families.
(F) Recommend voluntary strategies with employers to maintain or
increase employer-sponsored health coverage for employees’ dependents
under the age of 19 years.
(G) Provide guidance in the development of the pilot research
demonstration project for pursuing affordable health insurance or
assistance options for uninsured children whose families have incomes
over 300 percent of the federal poverty level and, based on the results of
the pilot research projects, recommend to the Legislature strategies for
increasing coverage for this population.
(H) Study the adequacy of the provider network and seek broad
participation from traditional and safety-net providers by recommending
strategies to ensure adequate provider reimbursement rates.
(I) Employ all other appropriate strategies necessary or convenient
to enable it to fully and adequately perform its duties and exercise the
powers expressly granted.
12693.992. (a) For the purposes specified in this Chapter and
subject to Section 30132.5 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, funds
appropriated from the California Healthy Kids Sub-Account established
at paragraph (12) of subdivision (b) of Section 30132.3 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code shall be used only for:
(1) The provision of children’s health insurance, through Healthy
Families, only for children defined in subdivision (b) of Section 12693.99;
and
(2) Implementation of those measures contained in Section
12693.991.
(b) Funds expended or transferred from the California Healthy Kids
Sub-Account shall supplement and not supplant the following:
(1) Local funds used to secure state or federal matching funds for
any children’s health services, children’s health, or medical assistance
programs, including but not limited to the following: (A) Healthy Families;
(B) Medi-Cal, whether full-scope or emergency or pregnancy-related care
only; and (C) the Child Health and Disability Prevention Program; but not
including funds generated by or expended from the California Children
and Families Trust Fund (Division 108 (commencing at Section 130100) of
the Health and Safety Code) or from the County Health Initiative Matching
Fund (Part 6.4 (commencing with Section 12699.50) of Division 2 of the
Insurance Code).
(2) State funds used to secure federal matching funds for any
children’s health services, children’s health, or medical assistance
programs, including but not limited to the following:
(A) Healthy Families;
(B) Medi-Cal, whether full-scope or emergency or pregnancy-

text of proposed laws
related care only; and
(C) The Child Health and Disability Prevention Program.
(3) State or federal funds to continue or maintain the amount, duration,
scope and structure of benefits that existed as of September 30, 2005 for any
children’s health services, children’s health, or medical assistance programs,
including but not limited to the following:
(A) Healthy Families;
(B) Medi-Cal, whether full-scope or emergency or pregnancyrelated care only; and
(C) The Child Health and Disability Prevention Program.
(c) The state may not increase a county’s share of costs for children’s
health services unless the state includes adequate funding to fully
compensate for such increased costs.
12693.993. (a) Nothing in this Chapter is intended to:
(1) Reduce or restrict any existing entitlement under Medi-Cal;
(2) Reduce or restrict the existing eligibility levels or the amount,
duration, scope or structure of benefits in place as of September 30, 2005
under either Healthy Families or Medi-Cal;
(3) Create a new entitlement for children enrolled in Healthy
Families;
(4) Preclude a child from eligibility for any other children’s health
insurance, medical service or medical assistance program, including but
not limited to restricted Medi-Cal or Medi-Cal with a share of cost;
(5) Preclude a child from eligibility for Healthy Families or MediCal if less restrictive eligibility criteria are enacted;
(6) Reduce or erode children’s existing employer-sponsored health
insurance coverage;
(7) Restrict any public appropriations or private contributions for
the provision of children’s health insurance through Medi-Cal or Healthy
Families, such as federal financial match for state or county Medi-Cal
funding; county, regional or local funding; private foundation grants, and
family premium contributions;
(8) Prohibit eligibility for Medi-Cal or Healthy Families based on
concurrent eligibility for a local CHI; nor
(9) Create or require creation of a new state department or agency.
(b) The State Department of Health Services and the Managed Risk
Medical Insurance Board may explore and utilize any options available
under federal law to allow the use of charitable or other funding by private
and public not-for-profit organizations as a match for federal funds for use
in the provision of coverage consisent with the provisions of this Chapter.
SEC. 7. Article 6 (commencing with Section 1246) is added to
Chapter 1 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code, to read:
Article 6.

Community Clinics

1246. (a) Funds in the Community Clinics Uninsured Sub-Account
established at paragraph (3) of subdivision (c) of Section 30132.3 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code shall be administered by the State Department
of Health Services solely for the purposes of this Section. The department
shall allocate the funds for eligible non-profit clinic corporations providing
vital health care services, including services related to smoking cessation
programs to assist smokers to quit smoking, and educational efforts related
to tobacco prevention, to the uninsured. The funds shall be allocated by the
Department pursuant to the provisions of this Section.
(b) Annually, commencing August 1, 2007, the Department shall
allocate to each eligible non-profit clinic corporation a percentage of the
balance present in the Community Clinics Uninsured Sub-Account as of
July 1 of the year the allocations are made based on the formula provided
for in subdivision (c) and subject to subdivision (d).
(c) Funds in the Community Clinics Uninsured Sub-Account shall
be allocated only to eligible non-profit clinic corporations. Funds in the
Community Clinics Uninsured Sub-Account shall be allocated to eligible
non-profit clinic corporations on a percentage basis based on the total
number of uninsured patient encounters.
(1) For purposes of this Section, an “eligible non-profit clinic
corporation” shall meet both of the following requirements:
(A) The corporation shall consist of non-profit free and community

Text of Proposed Laws | 153

86

text of proposed laws

86

clinics licensed pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 1204 or of clinics
operated by a federally recognized Indian tribe or tribal organization and
exempt from licensure pursuant to subdivision (c) of Section 1206.
(B) The corporation must provide at least 1,000 uninsured patient
encounters based on data submitted to the Office of Statewide Health
Planning and Development pursuant to the reporting procedures
established under Section 1216 for the year the allocations are made.
(2) The total number of uninsured patient encounters shall be based
on data submitted by each eligible non-profit clinic corporation to the Office
of Statewide Health Planning and Development pursuant to the reporting
procedures established under Section 1216. Beginning August 1, 2007 and
every year thereafter, the allocations shall be made by the department based
on data submitted by each eligible non-profit clinic corporation to the Office
of Statewide Health Planning and Development by February 15 of the year
the allocations are made.
(3) For purposes of this Section, except as otherwise provided
in paragraph (4), an uninsured patient encounter shall be defined as
an encounter for which the patient has no public or private third party
coverage. An uninsured patient encounter shall also include encounters
involving patients in programs operated by counties pursuant to Part 4.7
(commencing with Section 16900) and Part 5 (commencing with Section
17000) of Division 9 of the Welfare and Institutions Code. An uninsured
patient encounter must consist of a primary and preventive health care
service, including tobacco cessation and prevention services, and
specialty care services traditionally provided by comprehensive primary
care providers.
(4) Each uninsured patient encounter shall count as one encounter,
except that the encounters involving patients in programs operated
pursuant to paragraph (1) of subdivision (aa) of Section 14132 and Division
24 (commencing with Section 24000) of the Welfare and Institutions Code,
and pursuant to Article 6 (commencing with Section 124025) of Chapter
3 of Part 2 of Division 106 of the Health and Safety Code shall count as
0.15 encounter for purposes of determining the total number of uninsured
patient encounters for each eligible non-profit clinic corporation.
(5) The Department shall compute each eligible non-profit clinic
corporation’s percentage of total uninsured patient encounters for
all eligible non-profit clinic corporations. The Department shall then
apply these percentages to the available funds in the Sub-Account to
compute a preliminary allocation amount for each eligible non-profit
clinic corporation. Final allocation amounts will be created pursuant to
paragraph (6).
(6) Final allocation amounts shall be determined as follows:
(A) If the preliminary allocation for an eligible non-profit clinic
corporation is equal to or less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000),
the allocation for that eligible non-profit corporation shall be twenty-five
thousand dollars ($25,000).
(B) For all eligible non-profit clinic corporations with preliminary
allocations of more than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000),
the Department shall compute each such eligible non-profit clinic
corporation’s percentage of the total uninsured patient encounters and
apply the percentage to the remaining funds available to determine the
final allocation amount for each such eligible non-profit clinic corporation,
subject to subparagraph (c).
(C) No eligible non-profit clinic corporation shall receive an
allocation in excess of two percent (2%) of the total monies distributed
to all eligible non-profit clinic corporations in that year. Allocations that
are subject to the two percent (2%) limit shall be reallocated to those
other eligible non-profit clinic corporations receiving allocations under
subparagraph (B) utilizing the methodology in paragraphs (3) and (4), but
provided that reallocations shall not make any final allocation surpass the
two percent (2%) limit.
(d) The State Department of Health Services shall be reimbursed from
the Community Clinics Uninsured Sub-Account for the Department’s actual
cost of administration. The total amount available for reimbursement of
the Department’s administrative costs shall not exceed one percent (1%)
of the monies credited to the Sub-Account during the fiscal year.
SEC. 8. Nursing Workforce Education Investment
Section 128224.5 is added to the Health and Safety Code, to read:
128224.5. (a) The California Healthcare Workforce Policy
Commission shall oversee the plan for and distribution of funds in the

154 | Text of Proposed Laws

Nursing Workforce Education Sub-Account created by paragraph (6) of
subdivision (c) of Section 30132.3 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. A
state nursing contract program with accredited schools and programs that
educate students seeking degrees in nursing, including associate degree
programs (“ADN”), bachelor of science degree programs (“BSN”),
master’s degree programs (“MSN”), programs for Advanced Practice
Registered Nurses, and higher graduate nursing education programs
(“DNSc/Ph.D.”), shall be developed to create, expand and improve
programs to educate students to become practicing registered nurses,
nurses with advanced clinical skills, nurse managers, and faculty for
schools of nursing. Priority shall be given to programs that increase the
number and types of nursing student graduates and educators most likely
to meet the state’s most pressing needs for registered nurses.
(b) The California Healthcare Workforce Policy Commission shall
recommend to the director the California Board of Registered Nursing
(“BRN”)-approved registered nurse education programs and California
graduate nursing education programs (MSN, DNSc/Ph.D.) that shall
be funded under subdivision (a). For purposes of this section the term
“Advanced Practice Registered Nurse Programs” refers to programs that
educate nurses with advanced clinical skills, including, but not limited to,
nurse anesthetists, clinical nurse specialists, nurse practitioners, nurse
midwives, and public health nurses.
Section 128225.5 is added to the Health and Safety Code, to read:
128225.5. The director shall utilize the funds appropriated to
implement the recommendations of the California Healthcare Workforce
Policy Commission pursuant to Section 128224.5; and to reimburse the
office and the commission for all reasonable, actual, direct administrative
costs incurred to implement this Section, not to exceed one percent (1%) of
the amount deposited into the Nursing Workforce Education Sub-Account
for the same period. The director shall utilize all funds appropriated to the
extent reasonably possible. To the extent any funds appropriated are not
utilized, or after being committed are returned or remain unspent for any
reason, such funds shall remain in or shall be re-deposited into the Nursing
Workforce Education Sub-Account for appropriation and use for the same
purpose as provided in paragraphs (6)(A) or (6)(B) of subdivision (c) of
Section 30132.3 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, as appropriate.
SEC. 9. Emergency and Trauma Hospital Services
Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 1797.300) is added to Division
2.5 of the Health and Safety Code, to read:

CHAPTER 4.5.
Article 1.

HOSPITAL EMERGENCY SERVICES

The Emergency and Trauma Hospital Services
Sub-Account

1797.300. To support the public’s need for hospital emergency
services, the department shall administer funds made available to hospitals
for such services as provided by this Chapter.
1797.301. (a) The department shall calculate each eligible hospital’s
funding percentage to be used for the next calendar year based upon the
information submitted by such hospital pursuant to Section 1797.302 and
notify each eligible hospital of its proposed funding percentage no later
than June 15 of each calendar year.
(b) The department shall receive and review the accuracy and
completeness of information submitted by eligible hospitals pursuant to
Section 1797.302. The department shall develop a standard form to be
utilized for reporting such information by eligible hospitals, but shall
accept information from eligible hospitals that is not reported on such
standard form. The department shall allow hospitals to report such
information electronically no later than April 30, 2008.
(c) The department shall notify each hospital submitting the
information specified under subdivision (a) of Section 1797.302 in writing
through a communication delivered by no later than April 30 each year
confirming the information it has from such hospital and of any apparent
discrepancies in the accuracy, completeness, or legibility of information
submitted by such hospital pursuant to Section 1797.302. Unless such
written notice is timely delivered to an eligible hospital, the information it
reports pursuant to Section 1797.302 shall be deemed to be complete and
accurate, but shall be subject to audit under subdivision (f).
(d) A hospital that receives notice from the department that the
information it reported was not accurate, complete, or legible shall have

(PROPOSITION 86 CONTINUED)

30 days from the date the notice is received to provide the department with
correct, complete and legible information. Such corrected or supplemental
information shall be used by the department to make the calculation
required by subdivision (a), but shall be subject to audit under subdivision
(f). A hospital that does not provide sufficient legible information to
establish that it qualifies as an eligible hospital or to allow the department
to make the calculation required under subdivision (a) shall not be an
eligible hospital.
(e) The department may enter into an agreement with the Office
of Statewide Health Planning and Development or another state agency
or private party to assist it in analyzing information reported by eligible
hospitals and making the hospital funding allocation computations as
provided under this Chapter.
(f) To ensure that the funds received by hospitals are utilized for
the purpose specified in this Article, the department shall audit the use
by eligible hospitals of any funds received pursuant to Section 1797.304,
and the accuracy of data on emergency department patient encounters
and other information any hospital reports under this Article, as follows:
the department shall randomly select twenty percent (20%) of all eligible
hospitals each year for audit of the information they submit. Additionally,
the department may conduct a field audit of the use of funds or information
submitted by any hospital. If the department determines upon audit that
any funds received were improperly used, or that inaccurate data were
reported by the eligible hospital resulted in an allocation of excess funds
to the eligible hospital, the department shall recover any excess amounts
allocated to, or any funds improperly used by, the eligible hospital. The
department may impose a fine of not more than twenty-five percent (25%)
of any funds received by the eligible hospital that were improperly used, or
the department may impose a fine of not more than two times any amounts
improperly used or received by the eligible hospital if it finds such amounts
were the result of gross negligence or intentional misconduct in reporting
data or improperly using allocated funds under this Article on the part
of the hospital. Any fines imposed by the department shall be stayed if
appealed by the hospital pursuant to subdivision (g) until judgment by a
court of final jurisdiction. In no event shall a hospital be subject to multiple
penalties for both improperly using and receiving the same funds.
(g)(1) A licensed hospital owner shall have the right to appeal
the imposition of any fine by the department, or a determination by the
department that its hospital is not an eligible hospital, for any reason,
or an alleged computational or typographical error by the department
resulting in an incorrect allocation of funds to its hospital under Section
1797.304. A hospital shall not be entitled to be reclassified as an eligible
hospital or to have an increase in funds received under this Chapter based
upon subsequent corrections to its own final reporting of incorrect data
used to determine funding allocations under this Article.
(2) Any such appeal shall be heard before an administrative law
judge employed by the Office of Administrative Hearings. The hearing
shall be held in accordance with Chapter 5 (commencing with Section
11500) of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code. The
decision of the administrative law judge shall be in writing; shall include
findings of fact and conclusions of law; shall be final; and shall be subject
to appeal as provided by Section 11523 of the Government Code. The
decision of the administrative law judge shall be made within 60 days after
the conclusion of the hearing and shall be effective upon filing and service
upon the petitioner.
(3) The appeal rights of hospitals under this subdivision (g) shall
not be interpreted to preclude any other legal or equitable relief that may
be available.
(h) Any fines or other recoveries collected by the department shall
be deposited in the Emergency and Trauma Hospital Services SubAccount within the Tobacco Tax Fund for allocation to eligible hospitals in
accordance with the provisions of Section 1797.304. Such funds shall not
be used for administrative costs, and shall be supplemental to, and shall
not supplant, any other funds available to be allocated from such SubAccount to eligible hospitals.
(i) In the event it is determined, upon a final adjudicatory decision that
is no longer subject to appeal, that a hospital has been incorrectly determined
to not qualify as an eligible hospital, or was allocated an amount less than
the amount to which it is entitled under Section 1797.304, the department
shall, from the next allocation of funds to hospitals under Section 1797.304,
allocate to such hospital the additional amount to which it is entitled, and

text of proposed laws
reduce the allocation to all other eligible hospitals pro rata.
1797.302. (a) Each hospital seeking designation as an eligible
hospital shall submit the following information to the department by no
later than February 15 of each year, commencing the first February 15
following the operative date of this Act:
(1) The number of emergency department encounters that took place
in the hospital’s emergency department during the preceding calendar
year;
(2) The total amount of charity care costs of the hospital for the
preceding calendar year;
(3) The total amount of bad-debt costs of the hospital for the
preceding calendar year;
(4) The total amount of county indigent program effort costs of the
hospital for the preceding calendar year;
(5) If requested, a photocopy of the hospital’s operating license from
the State Department of Health Services or equivalent documentation
establishing that it operates a licensed emergency department;
(6) A declaration of commitment to provide emergency services and
training as required by subdivision (a) of Section 1797.303.
(b) Both pediatric and adult patients shall be included in the data
submitted. The accuracy of the data shall be attested to in writing by an
authorized senior hospital official. No other data or information shall
be required by the department to be reported by eligible hospitals for
purposes of this Chapter.
(c) Each hospital seeking status as an eligible hospital under
this Chapter that receives a preponderance of its revenue from a single
associated comprehensive group practice prepayment health care service
plan shall report information required by this section for all patients, and
not just for patients who are not enrolled in an associated health care
service plan.
1797.303. (a) An eligible hospital shall, throughout each calendar
quarter in which it receives an allocation pursuant to Section 1797.304:
(1) Maintain an operational emergency department available within
its capabilities and licensure to provide emergency care and treatment, as
required by law, to any pediatric or adult member of the public who has an
emergency medical condition.
(2) Do all of the following:
(A) Participate in a minimum of two disaster-training exercises
annually;
(B) Provide training and information as appropriate to the hospital’s
medical staff, nurses, technicians and administrative personnel regarding
the identification, management, and reporting of emergency medical
conditions and communicable diseases, as well as triage procedures in
cases of mass casualties;
(C) Collaborate with state and local emergency medical services
agencies and public health authorities in establishing communications
procedures in preparation for and during a disaster situation; and
(D) Establish and maintain an emergency and disaster management
plan. This plan shall include response preparations to care for victims of
terrorist attacks and other disasters. The plan shall be made available by
the hospital for public inspection.
(b) It is the policy of the state to encourage hospitals to work
cooperatively to develop regional plans for assuring maximum availability
of emergency services to all patients, and to share equitably in the provision
of emergency services to uninsured and low income underinsured patients
in achieving such maximum availability of emergency services.
(1) Each hospital receiving funds under this Chapter that operates
a basic or comprehensive licensed emergency department may participate
in the development of a regional or other local plan for equitably sharing
responsibility for providing emergency services to uninsured and lowincome underinsured patients arriving at the hospital via ambulance. Any
such plan may be developed under the auspices of a hospital association
or through other cooperative arrangements, and shall be submitted to
the county or other local emergency services authority for approval and
continuing oversight of implementation.
(2) Each hospital receiving funds under this Chapter may work
cooperatively with one or more other hospitals to develop a plan for
providing maximum coverage of specialty medical services. Any such plan
may include such items as coordinated coverage of particular medical

Text of Proposed Laws | 155

86

text of proposed laws

86

specialty services; alternate coverage of particular medical specialty
services; and joint programs for the payment of coverage fees to physician
specialists for providing on-call coverage of emergency services. Any
such plan shall be submitted to and approved by the county or other local
emergency services authority for approval and continuing oversight of
implementation.
(3) To the extent that any hospital or hospitals work cooperatively in
developing and implementing the plans for providing emergency services
described in this Section, the people intend that such hospital or hospitals
shall incur no liability under federal or state antitrust or other anticompetition laws prohibiting combinations in restraint of trade, including,
without limitation, the provisions of Chapter 2 (commencing with Section
16700) of Part 2 of Division 7 of the Business and Professions Code.
(c) Any funds received by an eligible hospital under this Article shall
not be used in the determination of uncompensated costs for the purpose of
the limitation on payment adjustments described in Section 1923(g) of the
Social Security Act and any provision of state law which incorporates such
limitation, to the extent consistent with federal law.
1797.304. (a) Funds deposited in the Emergency and Trauma
Hospital Services Sub-Account, together with all interest and investment
income earned thereon, shall be continuously appropriated without
regard to fiscal years to and administered by the state Department of
Health Services. The department shall allocate the funds solely to eligible
hospitals as provided by this Article.
(b) Quarterly, commencing June 30 following the operative date
of this Chapter, the department shall allocate to each eligible hospital
a percentage of the balance of the Hospital Sub-Account equal to such
hospital’s funding percentage, as determined by the department pursuant
to Section 1797.301, except as follows:
(1) The annual aggregate allocation to all hospitals that receive a
preponderance of their revenue from the same associated comprehensive
group practice prepayment health care service plan shall not exceed
forty million dollars ($40,000,000.00) during any calendar year, and the
department shall reduce the quarterly allocation to each such hospital pro
rata, if and to the extent necessary, to contain the aggregate allocation to
all such hospitals within any calendar year to a maximum of forty million
dollars ($40,000,000.00). The maximum annual aggregate allocation shall
be applied by the department in increments of no more than ten million
dollars ($10,000,000.00) to each of the first three quarterly distributions
of each calendar year, but no specific portion of the limit on maximum
annual aggregate distributions provided by this subsection shall apply to
other quarterly distributions to such hospitals.
(2) The maximum aggregate annual allocation of forty million
dollars ($40,000,000.00) to all hospitals that receive a preponderance
of their revenue from the same associated comprehensive group practice
prepayment health care service plan set forth in paragraph (1) above shall
be adjusted upward or downward annually, together with corresponding
changes in any quarterly limits, commencing on January 1, 2009, by the
same percentage increase or decrease in the aggregate amount deposited
in the Hospital Sub-Account for the immediate prior calendar year against
the aggregate amount deposited in the Hospital Sub-Account during
the 2007 calendar year. Any adjustment that increases or decreases the
maximum aggregate annual allocation to such hospitals shall be applied
only to the then current calendar year.
(3) After making the adjustment to the maximum aggregate annual
allocation to hospitals that receive a preponderance of their revenue from
the same associated comprehensive group practice prepayment health
care service plan provided by paragraph (2) above, the department shall
further adjust such maximum aggregate annual allocation by increasing
or decreasing it by a percentage factor equal to the percentage increase or
decrease in the aggregate funding percentage by all hospitals receiving a
preponderance of their revenue from the same associated comprehensive
group practice prepayment health care service plan in the 2007 calendar
year against the aggregate funding percentage of all hospitals associated
with the same health care service plan for the most recent calendar year.
(4) After making the adjustments to the allocation of funds as
provided by paragraphs (1) through (3) above, the department shall
allocate any funds remaining in the Hospital Sub-Account to hospitals that
do not receive a preponderance of their revenue from the same associated
comprehensive group practice prepayment health care service plan pro
rata based upon their respective funding percentages.

156 | Text of Proposed Laws

(c) Prior to each allocation under subdivision (b), the actual costs of
the department (including any costs to the department resulting from the
charges under Section 11527 of the Government Code) for administering
the provisions of this Chapter shall be reimbursed from the Hospital SubAccount. The aggregate funds withdrawn for all administrative costs
under this subdivision shall not exceed one half of one percent (0.5%) of
the total amounts deposited in the Hospital Sub-Account (not including
any fines collected under subdivision (h) of Section 1797.301) during the
prior quarter.
(d) An eligible hospital shall use the funds received under this
Section only to further the provision of emergency services by such means
as payment for the unreimbursed cost of providing emergency services and
improving or expanding emergency services, facilities, or equipment. Such
funds may not be used to pay for more than the hospital’s unreimbursed
costs of providing emergency services, and no funds may be used to pay the
hospital for providing emergency services where it receives payment for
providing such services and has agreed to accept such payment as payment
in full. No funds may be used for the compensation of hospital management
executives, except for personnel who work full time in hospital emergency
departments. No funds may be used for equipment or capital improvements
not directly related to the improvement of hospital emergency department
facilities or critical care units. An eligible hospital owned by a public entity
may use funds it receives under this Chapter to secure federal matching
funds under the Medi-Cal program, or any other federal or state health
program that includes coverage of emergency services and reduces the
burden of providing uncompensated emergency services by hospitals and
physicians.
(e)(1) A hospital may not utilize funds received under this Article to
supplement payments physicians receive for services to patients enrolled
in the Medicare or Medi-Cal programs, but may use such funds to provide
payments to physicians for on-call coverage of emergency services to all
patients, including those enrolled in the Medicare or Medi-Cal programs,
as provided by subparagraph (2) below. Such payments to physicians for
on-call coverage shall not be considered payments for services.
(2) A hospital, in its sole discretion, may utilize funds it receives
under this Chapter to provide compensation to a physician that is fair and
reasonable for providing on-call coverage of emergency services only if
the governing board of the hospital makes the following findings:
(A) The amount or rate of payment is reasonable and necessary for
the hospital to maintain coverage of medical services to care for patients
entering the hospital through the emergency department, or patients who
have emergent conditions requiring the services of on-call physicians
while in the hospital; and
(B) The method and amount of compensation to any physician or
physicians is in compliance with applicable law.
(3) The governing board of a hospital, in its sole discretion, prior
to entering into an agreement to compensate one or more physicians for
on-call coverage of emergency services may obtain the opinion of an
independent financial analyst with expertise in the hospital industry that
the proposed amount or rate of payment to compensate physicians under
the proposed agreement is fair and reasonable under the circumstances.
If a hospital governing board elects to obtain such an opinion, it shall
notify the department in writing, and the department shall, within ten days
of receiving the hospital’s written request, provide the hospital with the
names of three independent financial analysts (which may be individuals
or firms) from a list of such independent financial analysts qualified to
issue such an opinion it establishes and maintains. The hospital shall
provide the list of the independent financial analysts it receives from
the department to the Executive Committee of the hospital’s organized
medical staff, and the medical staff Executive Committee shall have
fi fteen (15) days to review the list and make a peremptory challenge of
one of the independent financial analysts by notifying the hospital’s
governing board in writing. The hospital governing board may make a
peremptory challenge to one of the independent financial analysts. If two
of the three independent financial analysts are subject to a peremptory
challenge, the hospital governing board may retain only the remaining
independent financial analyst. If more than one independent financial
analyst is not subject to a peremptory challenge, the hospital shall so
notify the department, and the department shall select one of the remaining
independent financial analysts by lottery. In such event, the hospital may
retain only the independent financial analyst selected by lottery, unless the

(PROPOSITION 86 CONTINUED)

governing board of the hospital and the medical staff Executive Committee
agree upon the retention by the hospital of one of the other independent
financial analysts on the list of the three financial analysts provided to
the hospital by the department. The selected independent financial analyst
may charge the hospital a reasonable fee to issue a written opinion to
the hospital governing board as to whether the proposed amount or rate
of payment is fair and reasonable under the circumstances. In the event
such independent financial analyst opines that the proposed amount or
rate of payment is not fair and reasonable, upon request, the independent
financial analyst may describe a range of payment amounts and rates that
are fair and reasonable, under the circumstances, for the hospital to pay
various types of physicians for on-call coverage. The hospital may not
pay an amount or rate for on-call coverage of emergency services by a
physician that is higher than any amount or rate determined to be fair
and reasonable by the opinion of such independent financial analyst, nor
shall the hospital pay less than its highest written offer to the physician or
physicians that is fair and reasonable.
(4) A hospital may compensate a physician for providing on-call
emergency services coverage only through a written agreement.
(5) The requirements of this subdivision relate only to the use of
funds eligible hospitals received under this Article, and do not apply to the
use of other funds by hospitals to pay for on-call coverage of emergency
services by physicians.
(f) Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a hospital,
in its sole discretion, from providing reasonable compensation to a
physician for providing emergency physician staffing for the emergency
department in a manner consistent with the Medical Practice Act,
Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 2000) of Division 2 of the Business
and Professions Code.
(g) The hospital governing board, in consultation with the hospital’s
medical staff, shall ensure the appropriate coverage of medical services
within its capabilities to meet the emergency services needs of its patients
as required by law.
1797.305. The following definitions shall apply to terms utilized in
this Chapter:
(a) “Bad-debt cost” means the aggregate amount of accounts and
notes receivable accounted for during a calendar year by an eligible
hospital as credit losses, using any method generally accepted for
estimating such amounts on the date this Act became effective, based on
patients’ unwillingness to pay, and multiplied by the eligible hospital’s
cost-to-charges ratio.
(b) “County indigent program effort cost” means the amount of
care during a calendar year by an eligible hospital, expressed in dollars
and based upon the hospital’s full established rates, provided to indigent
patients for whom a county is responsible, whether the hospital is a county
hospital or a non-county hospital providing services to indigent patients
under arrangements with a county, multiplied by the eligible hospital’s
cost-to-charges ratio.
(c) “Charity care” means that portion of care provided by a hospital
to a patient for which a third party payer is not responsible and the
patient is unable to pay, and for which the hospital has no expectation of
payment.
(d) “Charity-care cost” means amounts actually written off, using
any method generally accepted for determining such amounts on the date
this Act became effective, by an eligible hospital during a calendar year for
that portion of care provided to a patient for whom a third party payer is
not responsible and the patient is unable to pay, multiplied by the hospital’s
cost-to-charges ratio.
(e) “Charity care policy” means a policy adopted by the hospital
establishing eligibility criteria for charity care services provided by the
hospital.
(f) “Cost-to-charges ratio” means a ratio determined by dividing
an eligible hospital’s operating expenses less other operating revenue by
gross patient revenue for its most recent reporting period.
(g) “Operating expenses” means the total expenses incurred for
providing patient care by the hospital. Operating expenses include (without
limitation) salaries and wages, employee benefits, professional fees, supplies,
purchased services, depreciation, leases, interest and other expenses.
(h) “Other operating revenue” means revenue generated by health
care operations from non-patient care services to patients and others.

text of proposed laws
(i) “Gross patient revenue” means the total charges at the hospital’s
full established rates for the provision of patient care services and includes
charges related to hospital-based physician professional services.
(j) ”Eligible hospital” or “hospital” means a hospital licensed
to a public or private entity or person under subdivision (a) of Section
1250 of the Health and Safety Code, including without limitation, any
hospital licensed to any county, city, hospital district, or the Regents of
the University of California (but not including any hospital licensed to a
department of the State of California, or to the federal government) which
either operates an emergency department or is a children’s hospital as
defined in Section 10727 of the Welfare and Institutions Code.
(k) “Emergency department encounter” or “emergency department
visit” means a face-to-face contact between a patient and the provider
who has primary responsibility for assessing and treating the patient in
an emergency department and exercises independent judgment in the care
of the patient. An emergency department encounter or visit is counted
for each patient of the emergency department, regardless of whether the
patient is admitted as an inpatient or treated and released as an outpatient.
An emergency department encounter or visit shall not be counted where
the patient received triage services only.
(l) “Emergency services” or “hospital emergency services” means
all services provided to patients in a hospital emergency department and
all other patient services related to treatment of an emergent medical
condition in any department or unit of a hospital, including, without
limitation, any procedures necessary to avoid loss of life, serious disability,
or severe pain until the patient has been stabilized and transferred to
another health facility or discharged.
(m) “Office” means the Office of Statewide Health Planning and
Development.
(n) “Department” means the state Department of Health Services.
(o) “Funding percentage” means the sum of (1) an eligible hospital’s
percentage of hospital emergency care (as defined in subdivision (s) below)
multiplied by a factor of .50, added to (2) such hospital’s percentage of
effort (as defined in subdivision (p) below) multiplied by a factor of .50, the
sum to be expressed as a percentage.
(p) “Hospital Sub-Account” or “Emergency and Trauma Hospital
Services Sub-Account” means the Emergency and Trauma Hospital
Services Sub-Account of the Tobacco Tax Fund established pursuant to
paragraph (7) of subdivision (c) of Section 30132.3 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code.
(q) “Tobacco Tax Fund” means the Tobacco Tax of 2006 Trust Fund
established pursuant to Section 30132 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.
(r) “Percentage of effort” means the sum of an eligible hospital’s
total amount of charity care cost plus that hospital’s total amount of baddebt cost plus that hospital’s county indigent program effort cost, as a
percentage of the sum of the total amount of charity care cost plus the total
amount of bad-debt cost plus the total county indigent program effort cost
reported in final form to the department by all eligible hospitals for the
same calendar year.
(s) “Percentage of hospital emergency care” means an eligible
hospital’s total emergency department encounters for the most recent
calendar year for which such data has been reported to the department
in final form, as a percentage of all emergency department encounters
reported in final form by all eligible hospitals for the same calendar year.
In the case of a children’s hospital that does not operate an emergency
department and provides emergency treatment to a patient under twentyone years of age under arrangements with an emergency department
of a hospital that is: (1) located within 1,000 yards of the children’s
hospital; and (2) is either (A) under common ownership or control with
the children’s hospital, or (B) has contracted with the children’s hospital
to provide emergency services to its patients under twenty-one years of
age, the children’s hospital providing emergency services to such patient
shall receive credit for the emergency department encounter, and not the
hospital operating the emergency department.
(t) “Unreimbursed cost of providing emergency service” means the
difference between the hospital’s cost of providing emergency services,
determined by multiplying its gross patient charges for providing such
services by its cost-to-charges ratio, and the amount it actually receives
for providing such services, where the hospital has not agreed to accept
the payment it receives as payment in full.

Text of Proposed Laws | 157

86

text of proposed laws
(u) “Physician” means a physician and surgeon licensed under
the Medical Practice Act, Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 2000) of
Division 2 of the Business and Professions Code.
1797.306. A hospital receiving funds under this Chapter shall
maintain a written record of its use of all such funds, which shall be available
to the department upon request, and available for inspection upon written
request by the public. A hospital shall return to the department any funds it
receives under this Chapter that it does not use for the purposes specified
within one year of receipt or, in the case of a capital project, are not
committed within two years of receipt by the governing board for a specific
use. Any unused funds returned to the department shall be deposited in the
Emergency and Trauma Hospital Services Sub-Account within the Tobacco
Tax of 2006 Trust Fund for allocation to eligible hospitals in accordance
with the provisions of Section 1797.304.
1797.307. The department may promulgate and adopt regulations
to implement, interpret and make specific the provisions of this Article
pursuant to the provisions of the Administrative Procedures Act as set forth
in Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section 11340) of Part 1 of Division 3 of
Title 2 of the Government Code. The department shall have no authority
to promulgate quasi-legislative rules, or to adopt any rule, guideline,
criterion, manual, order, standard, policy, procedure or interpretation
that is inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter. This Section shall
not be interpreted to allow the department to adopt regulations (as defined
by Section 11342.600 of the Government Code) in contravention of Section
11340.5 of the Government Code.
1797.308. No hospital may receive funds under this Chapter unless
it complies with the provisions of Article 2 (commencing with Section
1797.309), relating to financial assistance to certain low-income patients.
Article 2. Hospital Charity Care and Financial Assistance Policies

86

1797.309. For purposes of this Article the following definitions
shall apply:
(a) “Allocation” means an allocation of funds received by a hospital
under Article 1 (commencing with Section 1797.300) of this Chapter.
(b) “Discounted payment” means the payment amount after
application of a discount from its full charges for services offered by a
hospital to patients who have no or inadequate insurance and qualify
under the hospital’s discount payment policy.
(c) “Discount payment policy” means a policy adopted by the
hospital establishing eligibility criteria for receiving services for a
discounted payment.
(d) “Federal poverty level” means the most recent poverty guidelines
periodically adopted by the federal Department of Health and Human
Services for determining financial eligibility for participation in various
programs based upon family size as applicable to California.
(e) “Hospital” means an “eligible hospital,” as defined by
subdivision (j) of Section 1797.305.
1797.309.5. Each hospital shall comply with the provisions of this
Article throughout each calendar year in which it receives an allocation.
The requirements of this Article are applicable only to hospitals receiving
an allocation, and shall not be construed to limit the ability of the
Legislature to enact charity care or discount payment policies applicable
to all acute hospitals as a condition of licensure or participation in any
other state program.
1797.310. (a) Each hospital shall maintain an understandable,
written charity care policy and discount payment policy for low-income
patients with no or inadequate insurance.
(b) Each hospital’s charity care policy and discount payment
policy shall clearly state eligibility criteria based upon the income and
monetary assets of the patient, or consistent with the application of the
federal poverty level, the patient’s family. In determining such eligibility,
a hospital may consider income and monetary assets of the patient, or the
family of the patient. For purposes of such determination, monetary assets
shall not include retirement or deferred-compensation plans qualified
under the Internal Revenue Code, or non-qualified deferred compensation
plans. Furthermore, the first ten thousand dollars ($10,000) of a patient’s
or a patient’s family’s monetary assets shall not be counted in determining
eligibility; nor shall fi fty percent (50%) of such assets over the first ten
thousand dollars be counted in determining eligibility. The policy shall

158 | Text of Proposed Laws

also state the process used by the hospital to determine whether a patient
is eligible for charity care or discounted payment.
(c) Patients who are at or below three hundred fi fty percent (350%)
of the federal poverty level shall be eligible to apply for participation under
each hospital’s charity care policy or discount payment policy. However,
rural hospitals, as defined by Section 124840, may establish eligibility
levels for financial assistance and charity care at less than three hundred
fi fty percent (350%) of the federal poverty level as appropriate to maintain
their financial and operational integrity.
(d) Absent any regulatory prohibition, each hospital shall limit
expected payment for services it provides to any patient at or below three
hundred fi fty percent (350%) of the federal poverty level eligible under
its discount payment policy to the greater of the amount of payment the
hospital would receive for providing such services from Medicare or any
other government-sponsored health program of health benefits in which
the hospital participates. If the hospital provides a service for which there
is no established payment by Medicare or any other government-sponsored
program of health benefits in which the hospital participates, the hospital
shall establish an appropriate discounted payment.
(e) A hospital shall use its best efforts to ensure all financial
assistance policies are applied consistently.
(f) Any patient, or the patient’s legal representative, seeking either
charity care or discounted payment shall provide the hospital with
information concerning health benefits coverage, financial status and
other information that is reasonable and necessary for the hospital to make
a determination regarding the patient’s status relative to the hospital’s
charity care policy, discount payment policy, or eligibility for governmentsponsored programs. For purposes of proving income, a patient or the
patient’s legal representative, must provide verification of the patient’s or
the patient’s family’s income. Reasonable and necessary information on
monetary assets may include account numbers for all monetary assets, but
shall not include statements on retirement or deferred compensation plans
qualified under the Internal Revenue Code, or non-qualified deferred
compensation plans. Hospitals may require waivers or releases from the
patient, or the patient’s family, authorizing the hospital to obtain account
information from the financial or commercial institutions, or other entities
that hold or maintain the monetary assets to verify their value.
(g) Eligibility for charity care and discounted payments may be
determined at any time the hospital is in receipt of all the information
needed to determine the patient’s eligibility under its applicable policies.
(h) In determining a patient’s eligibility for financial assistance, a
hospital shall assist the patient in determining if he or she is eligible for
government-sponsored programs.
1797.311. (a) Each hospital shall post notices regarding the
availability of its discount payment policy and charity care policy. These
notices shall be posted in visible locations throughout the hospital,
including, but not limited to, patient admissions and registration, the
billing office, the emergency department and other outpatient settings.
(b) Every posted notice regarding financial assistance policies shall
contain brief instructions on how to apply for charity care or a discounted
payment. Each notice shall include a contact telephone number that a
patient or family member can call to obtain more information.
(c) A hospital shall train appropriate staff members about the
hospital’s discount payment policy. Training shall be provided to all staff
members who directly interact with patients regarding their hospital bills.
(d) Each hospital shall make its charity care and discount payment
policies available to appropriate community health and human services
agencies and other organizations that assist low-income patients.
1797.312. (a) Each hospital shall have a written policy about when
and under whose authority patient debt is advanced for collection, and
shall use its best efforts to ensure that patient accounts are processed
fairly and consistently.
(b) Each hospital shall establish a written policy defining standards
and practices for the collection of debt, and shall obtain a written
agreement from any agency that collects hospital receivables that it will
adhere to the hospital’s standards and scope of practices. In determining
the amount of a debt a hospital may seek to recover from patients eligible
under its charity care policy or discount payment policy, the hospital may
consider only income and monetary assets as limited by subdivision (b) of
Section 1797.310.

(PROPOSITION 86 CONTINUED)

(c) At time of billing, each hospital shall provide to all low-income
and uninsured patients, as the same are defined in policies adopted by the
hospital regarding eligibility for charity care and discounted payment, the
same information concerning services and charges provided to all other
patients who receive care at the hospital.
(d) When sending a bill to a patient, each hospital shall include:
(1) a statement that indicates that if the patient meets certain low-income
requirements the patient may be eligible for a government-sponsored
program or for financial assistance from the hospital; and (2) a statement
that provides the patient with the name and telephone number of a hospital
employee or office from whom or which the patient may obtain information
about the hospital’s financial assistance policies for patients and how to
apply for such assistance.
(e) For patients who have a completed application pending for either
government-sponsored coverage or for eligibility under the hospital’s own
charity care or discount payment policies, a hospital shall not knowingly
send that patient’s bill to a collection agency prior to 120 days from time
of initial billing, and without first having made more than one attempt to
collect the bill, or while the completed application is being processed by a
governmental agency or the hospital.
(f) If a patient qualifies for eligibility under the hospital’s charity
care or discount payment policy and is attempting in good faith to settle
an outstanding bill with the hospital by negotiating a reasonable payment
plan or by making regular partial payments of a reasonable amount,
the hospital shall not send the unpaid bill to any collection agency if the
hospital knows that doing so may negatively impact a patient’s credit.
(g) The hospital or collection agency operating on behalf of the
hospital shall not, in dealing with patients eligible under the hospital’s
charity care or discount payment policies, use wage garnishments or liens
on primary residences as a means of collecting unpaid hospital bills. This
requirement does not preclude hospitals from pursuing reimbursement
from third-party liability settlements or tortfeasors or other legally
responsible parties.
(h) Any extended payment plans offered by a hospital to assist
patients eligible under the hospital’s charity care or discount payment
policy, or any other policy adopted by the hospital for assisting low-income
patients with no or inadequate insurance in settling past due outstanding
hospital bills, shall be interest free.
1797.313. (a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the
amounts paid by parties for services resulting from reduced or waived
charges under a hospital’s discount payment or charity care policy shall
not constitute the hospital’s uniform, published, prevailing, or customary
charges, its usual fees to the general public, or its charges to non-MediCal purchasers under comparable circumstances, and shall not be used
to calculate a hospital’s median non-Medicare or Medi-Cal charges, for
purposes of any payment limit under the federal Medicare program, the
Medi-Cal program or any other federal or state-financed health care
program.
(b) Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prohibit a hospital
from uniformly imposing charges from its established charge schedule
or published rates, nor shall this Article preclude the recognition of a
hospital’s established charge schedule or published rates for purposes of
applying any payment limit, interim payment amount, or other payment
calculation based upon a hospital’s rates or charges under the Medi-Cal,
Medicare, worker’s compensation, or other federal, state or local public
program of health benefits.
(c) To the extent that any requirement of this Article results in a
federal determination that a hospital’s established charge schedule or
published rates are not the hospital’s customary or prevailing charges for
services, the requirement in question shall be inoperative. The department
shall seek federal guidance regarding modification to the requirement in
question. All other requirements in this Article shall remain operative.
SEC. 10. Preservation of Existing Funding
Section 16950.2 is added to Article 3 of Chapter 5 of Part 4.7 of
Division 9 of the Welfare and Institutions Code, to read:
16950.2. (a) An amount, equal to the amount appropriated and
allocated pursuant to Section 39.1 of Chapter 80 of the Statutes of 2005,
twenty-four million eight hundred three thousand dollars ($24,803,000),
shall be transferred and allocated pursuant to subdivision (b) from accounts
within the Cigarette and Tobacco Products Surtax Fund (commencing with

text of proposed laws
Section 30122 of the Revenue and Taxation Code) as follows:
(1) Twenty million two hundred twenty-seven thousand dollars
($20,227,000) from the Hospital Services Account.
(2) Four million five hundred seventy-six thousand dollars
($4,576,000) from the Physician Services Account.
(b) The funds specified in subdivision (a) shall be allocated
proportionately as follows:
(1) Twenty-two million three hundred twenty-four thousand dollars
($22,324,000) shall be administered and allocated for distribution through
the California Healthcare for Indigents Program (CHIP), Chapter 5
(commencing with Section 16940) of Part 4.7 of Division 9 of the Welfare
and Institutions Code.
(2) Two million four hundred seventy-nine thousand dollars
($2,479,000) shall be administered and allocated through the Rural Health
Services Program, Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 16930) of Part 4.7
of Division 9 of the Welfare and Institutions Code.
(c) This transfer shall be made on June 30 of the first fiscal year
following adoption of this Act, and on June 30 of each fiscal year thereafter.
Funds transferred are continuously appropriated without regard to fiscal
years for the purposes so stated for each such account.
(d)(1) Funds allocated pursuant to this Section from the Physician
Services Account and the Hospital Services Account in the Cigarette and
Tobacco Products Surtax Fund shall be used only for reimbursement of
physicians for losses incurred in providing uncompensated emergency
services in general acute-care hospitals providing basic, comprehensive,
or standby emergency services, as defined in Section 16953 of the Welfare
and Institutions Code. Funds shall be transferred to the Physician Services
Account in the county Emergency Medical Services Fund established
pursuant to Sections 16951 and 16952 of the Welfare and Institutions
Code, and shall be paid only to physicians who directly provide emergency
medical services to patients, based on claims submitted or a subsequent
reconciliation of claims. Payments shall be made as provided in Sections
16951 to 16959, inclusive, of the Welfare and Institutions Code, and
payments shall be made on an equitable basis, without preference to any
particular physician or group of physicians.
(2) If a county has an EMS Fund Advisory Committee that includes
both emergency physicians and emergency department on-call backup panel physicians, and if the committee unanimously approves, the
administrator of the EMS Fund may create a special fee schedule and claims
submission criteria for reimbursement for services rendered to uninsured
trauma patients, provided that no more than fi fteen percent (15%) of the
tobacco tax revenues allocated to the county’s EMS Fund is distributed
through this special fee schedule, that all physicians who render trauma
services are entitled to submit claims for reimbursement under this special
fee schedule, and that no physician’s claim may be reimbursed at greater
than fi fty percent (50%) of losses under this special fee schedule.
SEC. 11. Amendment
(a) Except as hereafter provided, this Act may only be amended
by the electors pursuant to Article II, Section 10(c) of the California
Constitution.
(b) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), the Legislature may amend
Sections 8 and 9 of this Act to further its purposes by a statute passed
in each house by roll-call vote entered in the journal, four-fifths of the
membership concurring.
(c) Notwithstanding subdivisions (a) and (b), the Legislature may
amend Article 2 (commencing with Section 1797.309) of Chapter 4.5 of
Division 2.5 of the Health and Safety Code to further its purposes by a
statute passed in each house by roll-call vote entered in the journal, twothirds of the membership concurring.
(d) Notwithstanding subdivisions (a), (b), and (c), the Legislature
may amend Sections 6 and 7 of this Act to further its purposes by a statute
passed in each house by roll-call vote entered in the journal, a majority of
the membership concurring, except that the Legislature may not amend
subdivision (b) of Section 12693.992 of the Insurance Code added by
Section 6 of this Act or subdivision (a) or paragraph (1) of subdivision (c)
of Section 1246 of the Health and Safety Code added by Section 7 of this
Act.
SEC. 12. Statutory References
Unless otherwise stated, all references in this act to existing statutes

Text of Proposed Laws | 159

86

text of proposed laws
are to statutes as they existed on December 31, 2005.
SEC. 13. Severability
If any provision of this act, or part thereof, is for any reason held to be
invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining provisions shall not be affected,
but shall remain in full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of
this Act are severable.
SEC. 14. Conflicting Measures
(a) This measure is intended to be comprehensive. It is the intent
of the People that in the event that this measure and another initiative
measure or measures relating to the same subject shall appear on the same
statewide election ballot, the provisions of the other measure or measures
shall be deemed to be in conflict with this measure. In the event that this
measure shall receive a greater number of affi rmative votes, the provisions
of this measure shall prevail in their entirety, and all provisions of the other
measure or measures shall be null and void.
(b) If this measure is approved by voters but superseded by law by
any other conflicting ballot measure approved by the voters at the same
election, and the conflicting ballot measure is later held invalid, this
measure shall be self-executing and given full force of law.
SEC. 15. Conformity with State Constitution
Section 14 is added to Article XIII B of the California Constitution,
to read:
SEC. 14. (a) “Appropriations subject to limitation” of each entity of
government shall not include appropriations of revenue from the Tobacco
Tax Act of 2006. No adjustment in the appropriations limit of any entity of
government shall be required pursuant to Section 3 as a result of revenue
being deposited in or appropriated from the Tobacco Tax of 2006 Trust Fund.
(b) The tax created by the Tobacco Tax Act of 2006 and the revenue
derived therefrom shall not be considered General Fund revenues for the
purposes of Section 8 of Article XVI.
(c) Distribution of moneys in the Tobacco Tax of 2006 Trust Fund
or any of the Accounts or Sub-Accounts created therein, shall be made
pursuant to the Tobacco Tax Act of 2006 notwithstanding any other
provision of this Constitution.

PROPOSITION 87

86
87

This initiative measure is submitted to the people of California in
accordance with the provisions of Section 8 of Article II of the California
Constitution.
This initiative measure adds provisions to the California Constitution,
amends, repeals, and adds sections to the Public Resources Code, and adds
sections to the Revenue and Taxation Code; therefore, existing provisions
proposed to be deleted are printed in strikeout type and new provisions
proposed to be added are printed in italic type to indicate that they are new.
PROPOSED LAW

THE CLEAN ALTERNATIVE ENERGY ACT
SECTION 1. TITLE.
This measure shall be known as the “Clean Alternative Energy Act.”
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND DECLARATIONS.
The people of California fi nd and declare the following:
A. Californians are facing a severe energy crisis. In 2005, the price
of oil nearly doubled and the cost of a gallon of gas soared to over $3 in
some areas, causing ordinary consumers extreme fi nancial distress while
the big oil companies reported record profits.
B. Our demand for energy is rising rapidly while our energy supply
shrinks, and we continue to grow more dependent on foreign oil.
C. Our excessive dependence on fossil fuels is imposing economic,
environmental, and social costs. High-polluting vehicles like diesel buses
and trucks create significant air pollution that is threatening the health of
our families and children with lung diseases and asthma. They can and
should be replaced by clean alternative fuel vehicles.
D. California is the only major oil-producing state in the country that
does not impose a comparable fee on oil produced at its wells. California’s

160 | Text of Proposed Laws

oil producers are enjoying windfall profits at the expense of California
consumers and taxpayers.
E. An assessment paid by California’s big oil companies on their
excess profits is a proven way to reclaim some of those revenues without
raising prices for consumers. California is the only one of the nation’s top
five oil-producing states without a comparable assessment on oil producers.
These assessments have proven to be impossible for the big oil companies
to “pass along” to consumers in the form of higher gas prices at the pump
because oil prices are set on the global market without regard to regional
or local costs or assessments.
F. Consumers should be protected from any attempt at price gouging
by big oil companies if they try to pass along their assessment costs by
increasing gas prices at the pump.
G. The proceeds from the assessment on California oil companies’
excess profits should be used to reduce the consumption of petroleum,
foster the development and use of clean alternative fuels, clean alternative
fuel vehicles, and renewable energy technologies, and improve energy
efficiency in California.
H. A clean, environmentally-sound energy economy with greatly
improved energy efficiency is a vital, pro-business goal. Given that
fossil fuel reserves are fi nite, and that the global appetite for energy is
growing, the only question is when—not if—we will make our economy
significantly more energy efficient and switch to renewable energies and
get more work out of less energy. But politicians in Washington have failed
to offer visionary leadership for energy independence or to capture the
economic rewards of early action in this critical technology sector.
I. The United States’ dependence on foreign oil is a serious danger
to U.S. national security, hampers U.S. foreign policy, and is a persistent
threat to the U.S. economy. Because 60% of the petroleum the U.S.
currently uses comes from foreign imports, and because California is the
largest consumer of petroleum products, we must do our part to address
these national problems.
J. Further delay in beginning the transition to clean, efficient, and
renewable energy puts California and the U.S. at risk for economic upheaval,
and cedes the opportunity for new energy technological and industrial
leadership to other more pro-active countries, thereby perpetuating our
dependence on foreign energy sources.
K. The transition to a renewable energy economy creates
an opportunity for California to profit economically, socially, and
environmentally. Clean alternative energy technologies like solar, wind,
and hydrogen, and clean alternative fuel vehicles like hybrids and biofueled cars and trucks are available today and can help reduce our
dependence on oil and gasoline.
L. California’s history of technological innovation and
entrepreneurship, international leadership in promoting energy efficiency,
abundance of world-leading academic institutions, national leadership
in environmental stewardship, and position as one of the United States’
largest energy consumers uniquely qualifies us to lead the way into the
renewable energy era.
SEC. 3. PURPOSE AND INTENT.
It is the intent of the people of California in enacting this measure to:
A. Invest approximately $4 billion in projects and programs designed
to enhance California’s energy independence and to reduce our use of
petroleum, including funding for: research, facility, and training grants
to California’s universities; vocational training grants to community
colleges; and buydowns, loans, loan guarantees, and credits to accelerate
the development and deployment of renewable energy technologies, energy
efficiency technologies, clean alternative fuels, and clean alternative fuel
vehicles;
B. Provide incentives to ordinary Californians to make clean
alternative fuel vehicles and clean alternative fuels as affordable and easy
to obtain as gasoline and diesel fuels and vehicles. Incentive programs like
this have already succeeded in breaking other countries’ oil dependence,
and they can easily work in California today;
C. Create new industries, technologies, and jobs focused on
renewable energy, energy efficiency, clean alternative fuels, and clean
alternative fuel vehicles, expand our state’s wealth, and ensure that any
loan proceeds, royalties, or license fees the state receives as a result of the
funding are reinvested in this program;
D. Reduce our dependence on foreign oil by developing renewable

(PROPOSITION 87 CONTINUED)

sources of energy and clean alternative fuels, increasing their usage here
in California, and improving our energy efficiency;
E. Improve our environment, public health, and quality of life by
reducing emissions of carbon dioxide and other global warming gases;
F. Reduce by 25% our use of petroleum transportation fuels in
California from the 2005 level of 16 billion gallons annually to begin
conserving four billion gallons annually by 2017, and conserve a total of
10 billion gallons over ten years between 2007 and 2017;
G. Invest in energy education in California so that California
workers can take advantage of the job opportunities that will open up for
those trained in emerging energy systems, technologies, and management
methods;
H. Make full use of California’s internal resources and its capability
for innovation to develop new ways to meet four of the state’s important
long-term goals: the Renewable Portfolio Standard, Control of Greenhouse
Gas Emissions from Motor Vehicles, the Governor’s Greenhouse Gas
targets, and the petroleum reduction goals set forth in this Act;
I. Impose an assessment on oil extracted from California’s oil wells
to ensure that California consumers’ future energy needs are met without
raising gasoline prices for consumers today. By ensuring that oil producers
in California fi nally pay their fair share, we will create a dedicated funding
stream of approximately $4 billion to secure California’s future energy
independence;
J. Ensure that California oil companies fully comply with the excess
profits assessment and protect consumers by prohibiting the oil companies,
consistent with U.S. Supreme Court precedent, from attempting to gouge
consumers by using the assessment as a pretext to raise prices on oil,
gasoline, and diesel fuels in California; and
K. Ensure that the revenues from the new assessment on California
oil producers are invested wisely in the most promising research and
technologies, and require mandatory independent audits and annual
progress reports so that the leaders of this project are accountable to the
people of California.
SEC. 4. Article XXXVI is added to the California Constitution, to
read:
SECTION 1. There is hereby established in state government the
Clean Alternative Energy Program.
SEC. 2. The Clean Alternative Energy Program shall be
administered by the California Energy Alternatives Program Authority,
which is established in Division 16 (commencing with Section 26000)
of the Public Resources Code, and shall be funded by the California
Energy Independence Fund Assessment, which is established in Part
21 (commencing with Section 42000) of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code.
SEC. 3. In addition to the powers set forth in Division 16
(commencing with Section 26000) of the Public Resources Code, the
California Energy Alternatives Program Authority shall have the power,
notwithstanding Article XVI, any other article of this Constitution, or
any other provision of law, to use revenues produced by the California
Energy Independence Fund Assessment to provide incentives including,
but not limited to, grants, loans, loan guarantees, buydowns, and credits
to universities, community colleges, research institutions, individuals,
companies, associations, partnerships, and corporations pursuant to the
Clean Alternative Energy Act or to secure the repayment of any bonds,
bond anticipation notes, and other obligations and indebtedness of the
authority issued pursuant to Division 16 (commencing with Section 26000)
of the Public Resources Code, and any other costs associated with such
bonds, that are used to fund such incentives.
SEC. 4. (a) Revenues produced by the California Energy
Independence Fund Assessment shall be deposited in the California Energy
Independence Fund, which is hereby created as a special fund in the State
Treasury, to be held in trust for the purposes of the Clean Alternative
Energy Act. Moneys held in the California Energy Independence Fund are
hereby continuously appropriated, without regard to fiscal year, for those
purposes alone.
(b) The California Energy Alternatives Program Authority shall
be authorized to expend four billion dollars ($4,000,000,000) from the
California Energy Independence Fund for the purposes of the Clean
Alternative Energy Act, as provided in subdivision (d) of Section 26045 of
the Public Resources Code.
(c) The proceeds of any bonds, bond anticipation notes, and other

text of proposed laws
obligations and indebtedness of the authority issued pursuant to Division
16 (commencing with Section 26000) of the Public Resources Code, the
revenues produced by any grants or loans made pursuant to the Clean
Alternative Energy Act, and any royalties or license fees generated
pursuant to the Clean Alternative Energy Act shall be deposited in the
California Energy Independence Fund and are hereby continuously
appropriated, without regard to fiscal year, for the purposes of the Clean
Alternative Energy Act alone.
(d) The moneys in the California Energy Independence Fund may not
be used for any purpose or program other than the purposes or programs
authorized by the Clean Alternative Energy Act, and may not be loaned to
the state General Fund, or to any other fund of the state, or to any fund of
a county, or any other entity, or borrowed by the Legislature, or any other
state or local agency, for any purpose other than the purposes authorized
by the Clean Alternative Energy Act.
(e) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Constitution,
revenues generated by the California Energy Independence Fund
Assessment shall not be deemed to be “revenues” or “taxes” for purposes
of computing any state expenditure or appropriation limit that is enacted
on or after June 6, 2006, nor shall their expenditure or appropriation be
subject to any reduction or limitation imposed pursuant to any provision
enacted after that date.
SEC. 5. Section 14 is added to Article XIII B of the California
Constitution, to read:
SEC. 14. (a) “Appropriations subject to limitation” of each entity
of government shall not include appropriations of revenue from the
California Energy Independence Fund, which is established in subdivision
(a) of Section 4 of Article XXXVI. No adjustment in the appropriations
limit of any entity of government shall be required pursuant to Section 3 as
a result of revenue being deposited in or appropriated from the California
Energy Independence Fund.
(b) Revenues generated by the California Energy Independence
Fund Assessment shall not be considered General Fund revenues for the
purposes of Section 8 and Section 8.5 of Article XVI.
SEC. 6. Section 26004 of the Public Resources Code is amended
to read:
26004. (a) There is in the state government the California
Alternative Energy and Advanced Transportation Financing California
Energy Alternatives Program Authority. The authority constitutes a public
instrumentality and the exercise by the authority of powers conferred
by this division and Article XXXVI of the California Constitution is the
performance of an essential public function.
(b) The authority shall consist of five nine members, as follows:
(1) The Secretary for Environmental Protection The Director of
Finance.
(2) The Chairperson of the State Energy Resources Conservation
and Development Commission.
(3) The President of the Public Utilities Commission. The
Treasurer.
(4) The Controller. A Californian who has expertise in economics,
energy markets, and energy efficiency technologies, appointed by the
Governor.
(5) The Treasurer, who shall serve as the chairperson of the authority.
A Californian who has expertise, and who has demonstrated leadership, in
public health, appointed by the Governor.
(6) A Californian who has expertise in finance, start-ups, and
venture capital, preferably with experience in enterprises comparable in
scale and purpose to those that would be eligible for funding pursuant to
the Clean Alternative Energy Act, appointed by the Controller.
(7) A renewable energy or energy efficiency expert from a California
university that awards doctoral degrees in the sciences who is either a
member of the National Academy of Sciences or the National Academy of
Engineering, or a Nobel Prize laureate, appointed by the Speaker of the
Assembly.
(8) The dean or a tenured faculty member of a major, nationally
recognized California business school that awards post-graduate degrees
who has significant experience in as many as possible of new technology
ventures, entrepreneurship, consumer marketing, consumer adoption of
new trends, and enterprises comparable in scale and purpose to those that
would be eligible for funding pursuant to the Clean Alternative Energy
Act, appointed by the Senate Committee on Rules.

Text of Proposed Laws | 161

87

text of proposed laws

87

(9) A Californian who has expertise, and who has demonstrated
leadership, in consumer advocacy, preferably with substantial experience
in consumer marketing and business, appointed by the Attorney General.
(c) The members listed in paragraphs (1) to (5)(3), inclusive, of
subdivision (b) may each designate a deputy or clerk in his or her agency
to act for and represent the member at all meetings of the authority, who
is employed under the member’s authority, and, notwithstanding Section
7.5 of the Government Code, each such designee may act in his or her
place and stead on the board. While serving on the board, the deputy may
exercise the same powers that the member could exercise if he or she were
personally present.
(d) The fi rst meeting of the authority after the voters’ enactment of
the Clean Alternative Energy Act shall be convened by the Treasurer within
60 days of the effective date of the Act. At the first meeting, the members of
the authority shall elect a chairperson, who shall serve a two-year term.
No chairperson shall serve more than two consecutive two-year terms.
(e) Members of the authority and any entity controlled by a member
shall not be eligible to apply for any incentive including, but not limited
to, any grant, loan, loan guarantee, credit, or buydown awarded by the
authority or any contract made by the authority.
(f) Members of the authority appointed pursuant to paragraphs (4)
to (9), inclusive, of subdivision (b) shall serve four-year terms and shall be
eligible to serve a maximum of two terms.
(g) Service as a member of the authority by a member of the faculty
or administration of the University of California shall not, by itself, be
deemed to be inconsistent, incompatible, in conflict with, or inimical
to the duties of a member of the authority as a member of the faculty
or administration of the University of California and shall not result in
automatic vacation of either office. Service as a member of the authority
by an employee of an entity that is eligible for funding from the authority
shall not be deemed to be inconsistent, incompatible, in conflict with, or
inimical to the duties of a member of the authority as an employee of an
entity that is eligible for funding from the authority.
SEC. 7. Section 26005 of the Public Resources Code is amended
to read:
26005. All members of the authority shall serve thereon without
compensation as members of the authority, except for the members
appointed pursuant to paragraphs (4) to (9), inclusive, of subdivision (b)
of Section 26004, who shall be entitled to receive a per diem, established
by the Department of Personnel Administration, based on comparable per
diem paid to members of similar state boards and commissions, for each
day actually spent in the discharge of the member’s duties. All members
of the authority shall be entitled to reasonable and necessary travel and
other expenses incurred in the performance of the member’s duties.
SEC. 8. Section 26006 of the Public Resources Code is amended
to read:
26006. The provisions of this division shall be administered by the
authority which shall have and is hereby vested with all powers reasonably
necessary to carry out the powers and responsibilities expressly granted
or imposed upon it under this division and under Article XXXVI of the
California Constitution.
SEC. 9. Section 26008 of the Public Resources Code is amended
to read:
26008. (a) The authority may employ an executive director and
any other persons as are necessary to enable it properly to perform the
duties imposed upon it by this division shall appoint a chief executive
officer with substantial business experience in the private sector at a
senior management level, preferably with experience in new technology,
to serve the authority, as soon as reasonably practicable. The executive
director chief executive officer shall serve at the pleasure of the authority
and shall receive such compensation as shall be fi xed by the authority.
The authority may delegate to the executive director the power to enter
contracts on behalf of the authority. The chief executive officer’s primary
responsibilities shall be to hire, direct, and manage the authority’s staff;
to develop the authority’s two-year and ten-year strategic plans pursuant
to Section 26045; to develop and recommend standards and procedures,
including a competitive selection process, to govern the authority’s
consideration and award of incentives including, but not limited to, grants,
loans, loan guarantees, credits, and buydowns pursuant to Section 26045;
to develop recommendations for the award of incentives including, but not
limited to, grants, loans, loan guarantees, credits, and buydowns pursuant

162 | Text of Proposed Laws

to Section 26045; to develop and recommend procedures and standards
to monitor recipients of incentives including, but not limited to, grants,
loans, loan guarantees, credits, and buydowns awarded by the authority
pursuant to Section 26045; and to execute and manage contracts on behalf
of the authority.
(b) From time to time, the authority shall determine the total number
of authorized employees for the authority.
(1) Notwithstanding Sections 19816, 19825, 19826, 19829, and
19832 of the Government Code, the authority shall fi x and approve
the compensation of the chief executive officer and other staff of the
authority.
(2) When fi xing and approving the compensation of the chief
executive officer and other staff of the authority pursuant to paragraph
(1), the authority shall be guided by the principles contained in Sections
19826 and 19829 of the Government Code, consistent with the authority’s
responsibility to recruit and retain highly qualified and effective
employees.
SEC. 10. Section 26010 of the Public Resources Code is amended
to read:
26010. (a) The Attorney General shall be the legal counsel for the
authority, but with the approval of the Attorney General, the authority may
employ such legal counsel as in its judgment is necessary or advisable
to enable it to carry out the duties and functions imposed upon it by this
division, including the employment of such bond counsel as may be deemed
advisable in connection with the issuance and sale of bonds.
(b) The Director of Finance Treasurer shall be the treasurer of the
authority.
SEC. 11. Section 26020 of the Public Resources Code is amended
to read:
26020. (a) The authority may incur indebtedness and issue and
renew negotiable bonds, notes, debentures, or other securities of any kind
or class to carry out its corporate purposes. All indebtedness, however
evidenced, shall be payable solely from revenues of the authority, including
the proceeds from the assessment imposed pursuant to Part 21 (commencing
with Section 42000) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and
the proceeds of its negotiable bonds, notes, debentures, or other securities,
and shall not exceed the sum of one billion dollars ($1,000,000,000) of
total debt outstanding.
(b) As used in this section, “total debt outstanding” does not include
either of the following:
(1) A bond for which provisions have been made for prepayment
through irrevocable escrow or other means, so that the bond is not
considered outstanding under its authorizing document.
(2) Indebtedness that is incurred to refund existing debts, except to
the extent that the indebtedness exceeds the amount of those debts.
SEC. 12. Section 26021 of the Public Resources Code is repealed.
26021. The Legislature may, by statute, authorize the authority to
issue bonds, as defi ned in Section 26022, in excess of the amount provided
in Section 26020.
SEC. 13. Section 26022 of the Public Resources Code is amended
to read:
26022. (a) The authority is authorized from time to time to issue
its negotiable bonds, notes, debentures, or other securities (hereinafter
collectively called “bonds”) for any of its purposes. The bonds may be
authorized, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, to fi nance
a single project for a single participating party, a series of projects for
a single participating party, a single project for several participating
parties, or several projects for several participating parties and to finance
expenditures authorized by the Clean Alternative Energy Act as set forth in
Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 26043). In anticipation of the sale of
bonds as authorized by Section 26020, or as may be authorized pursuant to
Section 26021, the authority may issue negotiable bond anticipation notes
and may renew the notes from time to time. The bond anticipation notes
may be paid from the proceeds of sale of the bonds of the authority in
anticipation of which they were issued. Notes and agreements relating to
the notes and bond anticipation notes, hereinafter collectively called notes,
and the resolution or resolutions authorizing the notes may contain any
provisions, conditions or limitations which a bond, agreement relating to
the bond, and bond resolution of the authority may contain. However, a
note or renewal of the note shall mature at a time not exceeding two years

(PROPOSITION 87 CONTINUED)

from the date of issue of the original note.
(b) Except as may otherwise be expressly provided by the authority
and except as more particularly provided in subdivision (e), every issue
of its bonds, notes, or other obligations shall be general obligations of the
authority payable from any revenues or moneys of the authority available for
these purposes and not otherwise pledged, subject only to any agreements
with the holders of particular bonds, notes, or other obligations pledging
any particular revenues or moneys and subject to any agreements with
any participating party. Notwithstanding that the bonds, notes, or other
obligations may be payable from a special fund, they are for all purposes
negotiable instruments, subject only to the provisions of the bonds, notes,
or other obligations for registration.
(c) Subject to the limitations in Sections 26020 and 26021, the bonds
Bonds may be issued as serial bonds or as term bonds, or the authority,
in its discretion, may issue bonds of both types. The bonds shall be
authorized by resolution of the authority and shall bear the date or dates,
mature at the time or times, not exceeding 50 years from their respective
dates, bear interest at the rate or rates, be payable at the time or times,
be in the denominations, be in the form, either coupon or registered,
carry the registration privileges, be executed in a manner, be payable in
lawful money of the United States of America at a place or places, and
be subject to terms of redemption, as the resolution or resolutions may
provide, provided, however, that bonds issued for purposes of the Clean
Alternative Energy Act shall have a maturity of not more than 25 years.
The bonds or notes shall be sold by the Treasurer within 60 days of receipt
of a certified copy of the authority’s resolution authorizing the sale of the
bonds. However, the authority, at its discretion, may adopt a resolution
extending the 60-day period. The sales may be a public or private sale,
and for the price or prices and on the terms and conditions, as the authority
shall determine after giving due consideration to the recommendations
of any participating party to be assisted from the proceeds of the bonds
or notes. Pending preparation of the defi nitive bonds, the Treasurer may
issue interim receipts, certificates, or temporary bonds which shall be
exchanged for the defi nitive bonds. The Treasurer may sell any bonds,
notes, or other evidence of indebtedness at a price below their par value.
However, the discount on any security so sold shall not exceed 6 percent
of the par value.
(d) Any resolution or resolutions authorizing any bonds or any issue
of bonds may contain provisions, which shall be a part of the contract with
the holders of the bonds to be authorized, as to all of the following:
(1) Pledging the full faith and credit of the authority or pledging all or
any part of the revenues of any project or any revenue-producing contract
or contracts made by the authority with any individual, partnership,
corporation, or association or other body, public or private, or other
moneys of the authority, including moneys deposited in the California
Energy Independence Fund created by Article XXXVI of the California
Constitution, to secure the payment of the bonds or of any particular issue
of bonds, subject to the agreements with bondholders as may then exist.
(2) The rentals, fees, purchase payments, loan repayments, and other
charges to be charged, and the amounts to be raised in each year by the
charges, and the use and disposition of the revenues.
(3) The setting aside of reserves or sinking funds, and the regulation
and disposition of the reserves or sinking funds.
(4) Limitations on the right of the authority or its agent to restrict and
regulate the use of the project or projects to be fi nanced out of the proceeds
of the bonds or any particular issue of bonds.
(5) Limitations on the purpose to which the proceeds of sale of any
issue of bonds then or thereafter to be issued may be applied and pledging
those proceeds to secure the payment of the bonds or any issue of the
bonds.
(6) Limitations on the issuance of additional bonds, the terms upon
which additional bonds may be issued and secured and the refunding of
outstanding bonds.
(7) The procedure, if any, by which the terms of any contract with
bondholders may be amended or abrogated, the amount of bonds the holders
of which must consent thereto, and the manner in which that consent may
be given.
(8) Limitations on expenditures for operating, administrative, or
other expenses of the authority.
(9) Defi ning the acts or omissions to act which constitute a default
in the duties of the authority to holders of its obligations and providing the

text of proposed laws
rights and remedies of the holders in the event of a default.
(10) The mortgaging of any project and the site of the project for the
purpose of securing the bondholders.
(11) The mortgaging of land, improvements, or other assets owned
by a participating party for the purpose of securing the bondholders.
(12) Procedures for the selection of projects to be fi nanced with the
proceeds of the bonds authorized by the resolution, if the bonds are to be
sold in advance of the designation of the projects and participating parties
to receive the fi nancing.
(e) Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, the authority
may pledge all moneys which are deposited in the Debt Service Account of
the California Energy Independence Fund, which is established by Article
XXXVI of the California Constitution, to the payment of the principal
of premium, if any, or interest on any bonds, bond anticipation notes or
other obligations of the authority used to finance the Clean Alternative
Energy Act, together with payment of all ancillary obligations, as that
term is defined in Section 26048, or other costs of issuing or carrying such
bonds. The authority shall determine from time to time and notify the State
Board of Equalization in writing the amounts which must be deposited
each month, or during the course of each fiscal year, in the Debt Service
Account to provide for all the aforementioned payments and costs, and any
coverage factors which are required by the bond documents. The lien of the
pledge of the amounts in the Debt Service Account shall vest automatically
upon the execution and delivery of the resolution, trust agreement, or
other agreement relating to the bonds, bond anticipation notes, other
obligations, or ancillary agreements, without requirement of any filing or
notice. If moneys are deposited in the Debt Service Account which exceed
the amounts necessary to pay current obligations for repayment of bonds,
other obligations and ancillary obligations, the authority shall apply such
excess funds to the early retirement of such bonds to the maximum extent
fiscally prudent.
(e) (f) Neither the members of the authority nor any person executing
the bonds or notes shall be liable personally on the bonds or notes or be
subject to any personal liability or accountability by reason of the issuance
thereof.
(f) (g) The authority shall have power out of any funds available for
these purposes to purchase its bonds or notes. The authority may hold,
pledge, cancel, or resell those bonds, subject to and in accordance with
agreements with bondholders.
SEC. 14. Section 26024 of the Public Resources Code is amended
to read:
26024. Bonds issued under the provisions of this division shall not
be deemed to constitute a debt or liability of the state or of any political
subdivision thereof, other than the authority, or a pledge of the faith and
credit of the state or of any such political subdivision, other than the
authority, but shall be payable solely from the funds herein provided
therefor. All such bonds shall contain on the face thereof a statement to
the following effect:
“Neither the faith and credit nor the taxing power of the State of
California is pledged to the payment of the principal of or interest on this
bond.”
The Except as set forth in Sections 26022 and 26049, the issuance of
bonds under the provisions of this division shall not directly or indirectly
or contingently obligate the state or any political subdivision thereof to
levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any
appropriation for their payment. Nothing contained in this section shall
prevent nor be construed to prevent the authority from pledging its full
faith and credit to the payment of bonds or issue of bonds authorized
pursuant to this division.
SEC. 15. Section 26029.4 of the Public Resources Code is amended
to read:
26029.4. Subject to Section 26029.6, the existence of the authority
may be terminated at any time by the Legislature no sooner than January
1, 2027, or after the assets of the authority have been fully expended,
whichever is later. Upon dissolution of the authority, the title to all
properties owned by it shall, subject to the interests of any participating
parties therein, vest in and become the property of the State of California
and shall not inure to the benefit of any private party. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, so long as any bonds or other obligations secured by the
assessment imposed by Part 21 (commencing with Section 42000) of
Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code remain outstanding, neither

Text of Proposed Laws | 163

87

text of proposed laws
the Legislature nor the people may reduce or eliminate the assessment,
and this pledge may be included in the proceedings of any such bonds as a
covenant with the holders of such bonds.
SEC. 16. Section 26033 of the Public Resources Code is amended
to read:
26033. All moneys received pursuant to the provisions of this
division, whether as proceeds from the sale of bonds, notes, or other
evidences of indebtedness or as revenues, shall be deemed to be trust
funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this division. Any bank
or trust company with which such moneys shall be deposited shall act as
trustee of such moneys and shall hold and apply the same for the purposes
hereof, subject to such regulations as the resolution authorizing the bonds
of any issue or the trust agreements securing such bonds may provide. The
proceeds from the assessment imposed pursuant to Part 21 (commencing
with Section 42000) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the
proceeds from the sale of bonds, notes, or other evidences of indebtedness
secured by the assessment, and any revenues generated by the Clean
Alternative Energy Act shall be deposited in the California Energy
Independence Fund, as established by Section 4 of Article XXXVI of the
California Constitution, and shall be used solely for the purposes of the
Clean Alternative Energy Act. Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, proceeds of bonds issued pursuant to this division, including those
deposited in the Clean Energy Independence Fund, may be held by a
trustee outside the state treasury system as provided by this chapter.
SEC. 17. Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 26043) is added to
Division 16 of the Public Resources Code, to read:

CHAPTER 4.

CLEAN ALTERNATIVE ENERGY PROGRAM
Article 1.

87

General Provisions

26043. This chapter implements the Clean Alternative Energy Act,
including Article XXXVI of the California Constitution. As used throughout
this chapter, “Act” refers to the Clean Alternative Energy Act.
26044. This chapter shall govern the expenditure of all revenues
deposited in the California Energy Independence Fund.
26045. In addition to its other powers and duties, the authority
shall perform the following functions:
(a) Within nine months of the effective date of the Act, and every
two years thereafter, adopt or modify two-year and ten-year strategic
plans to guide the authority’s funding decisions in the areas of petroleum
use reduction, academic research and vocational training, technology
innovation, and public education in order to meet the goals of this Act
within 10 years of the adoption of the authority’s initial strategic plans.
(b) Adopt procedures and standards, including a competitive
selection process, to govern the authority’s consideration and award of
incentives including, but not limited to, grants, loans, loan guarantees,
credits, and buydowns. The incentives approved by the authority shall not
be deemed to be contracts subject to the Public Contract Code.
(c) Award incentives including, but not limited to, grants, loans,
loan guarantees, credits, and buydowns, through a competitive selection
process designed to achieve the objectives of this Act within 10 years of
the date of adoption of the authority’s initial strategic plans. For loans
and loan guarantees, to the extent permitted under California law, the
authority shall use all prudent means to maximize the impact of the loans
and loan guarantees by recycling funds or remarketing loans or loan
guarantees.
(d) Expend four billion dollars ($4,000,000,000) within ten years of
the date of adoption of the authority’s initial strategic plans to achieve the
objectives of the Act from either the proceeds of bonds or other obligations
of the authority or from the California Energy Independence Fund
Assessment deposited in the accounts established pursuant to subdivision
(b) of Section 26049. This amount shall not include the costs of repaying
indebtedness associated with the Clean Alternative Energy Act, including
principal, interest, ancillary obligations, and other costs of any bonds
issued pursuant to Division 16 (commencing with Section 26000) of the
Public Resources Code. The authority shall expend any additional amounts
remaining in the California Energy Independence Fund in furtherance of
the purposes of this Act.

164 | Text of Proposed Laws

(e) Adopt procedures and standards to monitor recipients of
incentives including, but not limited to, grants, loans, loan guarantees,
credits, and buydowns, awarded by the authority.
(f) Adopt objective standards to measure the authority’s success in
meeting the goals of this Act.
(g) Ensure the completion of an annual independent financial
audit of the authority’s operations and issue public reports regarding the
authority’s activities.
(h) Notwithstanding Section 11005 of the Government Code,
accept additional revenue and real and personal property including,
but not limited to, gifts, bequests, royalties, interest, and appropriations
to supplement the authority’s funding. Notwithstanding Section 26049,
donors may earmark gifts for a particular purpose authorized by this Act.
(i) Appoint one advisory review committee of no more than nine
members for each account established pursuant to subdivision (b)
of Section 26049 to assist the authority in its review of applications
for funding, if the authority determines that it is necessary to obtain
expertise in market dynamics or technology that is not available within
the authority. Members of review committees shall be entitled to receive
a per diem, established by the Department of Personnel Administration,
based on comparable per diem paid to members of similar state review
committees, for each day actually spent in the discharge of the member’s
duties, plus reasonable and necessary travel and other expenses incurred
in the performance of the member’s duties. Members of the advisory review
committees and any entity controlled by a member shall not be eligible to
apply for any incentive including, but not limited to, any grant, loan, loan
guarantee, credit, or buydown awarded by the authority or any contract
made by the authority.
(j) Apply for federal matching funds where possible.
(k) Adopt regulations pursuant to the Administrative Procedure Act
(Ch. 3.5 (commencing with Sec. 11340), Pt. 1, Div. 3, Title 2, Gov. C.) as
necessary to implement this Act. In order to expedite the commencement
of the program mandated by this Act, however, the authority may adopt
interim regulations, including standards, without complying with the
procedures set forth in the Administrative Procedure Act. The interim
regulations shall remain in effect for 270 days unless earlier superseded
by regulations adopted pursuant to the Administrative Procedure Act.
26046. The authority shall take all actions authorized by this
chapter by a majority vote of a quorum of the authority, except as required
by subdivision (f) of Section 26050 and subdivision (c) of Section 26056.
26047. Section 1090 of the Government Code shall not apply to
any incentive including, but not limited to, a grant, loan, loan guarantee,
credit, or buydown, or contract awarded by the authority pursuant to this
chapter except where both of the following conditions are met:
(a) The member has a financial interest in an incentive or contract.
(b) The member fails to recuse himself or herself from making,
participating in making, or in any way attempting to use his or her official
position to influence a decision on the incentive or contract.
Article 2. Definitions
26048. As used in this Act, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
(a) “Ancillary obligation” means an obligation of the authority
entered into in connection with any bonds issued under this division,
including the following:
(1) A credit enhancement or liquidity agreement, including any credit
enhancement or liquidity agreement in the form of bond insurance, letter
of credit, standby bond purchase agreement, reimbursement agreement,
liquidity facility, or other similar arrangement.
(2) A remarketing agreement.
(3) An auction agent agreement.
(4) A broker-dealer agreement or other agreement relating to the
marketing of the bonds.
(5) An interest rate or other type of swap or hedging contract.
(6) An investment agreement, forward purchase agreement, or
similar structured investment contract.

(PROPOSITION 87 CONTINUED)

(b) “Buydown” means a payment to cover up to 100 percent of the
difference in the purchase price between a clean alternative fuel vehicle
and a comparable dedicated gasoline or diesel vehicle.
(c) “Clean alternative fuels” means fuels for use in transportation
including, but not limited to, hydrogen, methanol, natural gas, ethanol
blends consisting of at least 85 percent ethanol, and biodiesel blends
consisting of at least 20 percent biodiesel that, when used in vehicles,
have been demonstrated, to the satisfaction of the authority, to have the
ability to meet applicable vehicular emission standards and that, relative
to petroleum use, produce no net material increase in air pollution, water
pollution, or any other substances that are known to damage human
health, and reduce global warming pollution considering the full fuel-cycle
assessment. Any fuel not specifically mentioned above must significantly
decrease global warming pollution emissions compared to petroleum,
considering the full fuel-cycle assessment, in order to be considered a
clean alternative fuel.
(d) “Clean alternative fuel infrastructure” means facilities and
equipment dedicated to clean alternative fuel production, storage, and
distribution.
(e) “Clean alternative fuel vehicles” means light-, medium-, and
heavy-duty conversions, conversion systems, and vehicles powered by
clean alternative fuels, flexible-fuel vehicles, plug-in hybrids powered
primarily by electricity, and battery-powered electric vehicles, all of which
have been demonstrated, to the satisfaction of the authority, to have the
ability to meet applicable vehicular emission standards and that, relative to
petroleum use, produce no net material increase in air pollution (including
global warming pollution), water pollution, or any other substances that
are known to damage human health and which meet all applicable safety
certifications and standards necessary to operate in California.
(f) “Energy efficiency technologies” means methods of obtaining
more or better services from less energy, compared with typical current
practices in California.
(g) “Full fuel-cycle assessment” means evaluating and comparing
the full environmental and health impacts of each step in the life cycle of a
fuel, including, but not limited to, all of the following:
(1) Feedstock extraction, transport, and storage.
(2) Fuel production, distribution, transport, and storage.
(3) Vehicle operation, including refueling, combustion or conversion,
and evaporation.
(4) Electricity generation, distribution, and storage, when used in
vehicles for transportation.
(h) “Petroleum reduction” means methods of reducing total
projected petroleum use in California either through increased energy
efficiency, clean alternative fuels, or a combination of both.
(i) “Renewable energy technologies” means energy production
techniques, products or systems, distribution techniques, products or
systems, and transportation machinery, products or systems, all of which
utilize solely energy resources that are naturally regenerated over a
short time scale and delivered directly from the sun (such as thermal,
photochemical, and photoelectric), indirectly from the sun (such as
wind, hydropower facilities of 30MW or less that are consistent with
subparagraph (D) of paragraph (3) of subdividion (b) of Section 25743 of
the Public Resources Code, and photosynthetic energy stored in biomass
consistent with subdivisions (d) and (f) of Section 25743 of the Public
Resources Code), or from other natural movements or mechanisms of the
environment, such as geothermal and tidal energy. Renewable energy
technologies do not include technologies that use energy resources derived
from fossil fuels, waste products from fossil sources, or waste products
from inorganic sources.
Article 3.

Allocation of Funds

26049. (a) From the revenues generated by the California Energy
Independence Fund Assessment, there shall first be deposited in each
calendar month into the Debt Service Account of the California Energy
Independence Assessment Fund, which account is hereby created, moneys
in such an amount as the authority determines and notifies the State
Board of Equalization in writing is necessary and appropriate to pay the
debt service on any outstanding bonds, bond anticipation notes, or other
obligations and indebtedness of the authority, together with any ancillary
obligations, any coverage factors required by the bond documents, any costs

text of proposed laws
associated with the issuance or carrying of any bonds, bond anticipation
notes, or other obligations and indebtedness of the authority, and any
other costs determined by the authority to be necessary to carry out the
financing authorized by this chapter. Notwithstanding any other provision
of law, moneys in the Debt Service Account are continuously appropriated,
without regard to fiscal year, to the authority for the repayment of bonds,
other obligations or indebtedness or ancillary obligations or other costs of
the authority relating to outstanding bonds and may be held by a trustee as
authorized by Section 26023.
(b) After funds have been deposited in the Debt Service Account
pursuant to subdivision (a) in any month, all funds deposited in the
California Energy Independence Fund for that month, except as otherwise
provided by this Act, shall be allocated as follows:
(1) Fifty-seven and one-half percent (57.5%) to the Gasoline and
Diesel Use Reduction Account, which is hereby created.
(2) Twenty-six and three-quarters percent (26.75%) to the Research
and Innovation Acceleration Account, which is hereby created.
(3) Nine and three-quarters percent (9.75%) to the Commercialization
Acceleration Account, which is hereby created.
(4) Two and one-half percent (2.5%) to the Vocational Training
Account, which is hereby created.
(5) Three and one-half percent (3.5%) to the Public Education and
Administration Account, which is hereby created.
(c) Any funds allocated to the accounts established by paragraphs
(1) to (5), inclusive, of subdivision (b) that are not encumbered or
expended in any fiscal year shall remain in the same account for the next
fiscal year, except as provided in subdivision (d) of Section 26058. Once
all expenditures authorized by this Act have been made from the accounts
established by paragraphs (1) to (5), inclusive, of subdivision (b), all
proceeds from the California Energy Independence Fund Assessment shall
be deposited in the Debt Service Account established by subdivision (a)
until all obligations secured or payable from such account have been paid
or payment has been provided for.
(d) Funds deposited in the accounts of the California Energy
Independence Fund created in subdivision (b) shall be used to supplement,
and not to supplant, existing state funding for research, vocational training,
and technological development and deployment involving petroleum
reduction, energy efficiency, and renewable energy. To maximize the use
of available funds, the authority shall coordinate its expenditure of funds
in the California Energy Independence Fund with other state agencies to
avoid duplication and to ensure that the funds are expended efficiently and
efficaciously.
26050. Based on the standards set forth in Section 26056, the
authority may use the funds in the Gasoline and Diesel Use Reduction
Account for the following categories of expenditures, based on the relative
merit in petroleum reduction of transportation-related applications to the
authority for funding from this account:
(a) Market-based incentives including, but not limited to, loans, loan
guarantees, credits, and buydowns to fleets and individuals for the purchase
of clean alternative fuel vehicles sold in California. For buydowns to state
and local government agency fleets, the authority shall give preference to
school bus, emergency services vehicle, waste disposal truck, and mass
transit bus fleets. Other than these preference categories, buydowns will
be market-based and subject to the authority determining that the buydown
will significantly assist the technology to achieve unsubsidized market
competitiveness. Demonstration projects are discouraged.
(b) Production incentives including, but not limited to, loans, loan
guarantees, and credits for clean alternative fuel production in California,
excluding the production of electricity, except clean fuel cell based
electricity production.
(c) Incentives including, but not limited to, loans, loan guarantees,
credits, and grants for the construction of publicly accessible clean
alternative fuel refueling stations, including refueling stations that sell
ethanol blends consisting of at least 85 percent ethanol (E-85) sufficient
in number to match the existing supply of E-85 vehicles in California
based on the ratio of diesel vehicles to diesel fuel stations, and electric
vehicle chargers using similar criteria. The authority should consider
issuing suitable requests for proposals for refueling stations as soon as
practicable.
(d) Incentives including, but not limited to, loans, loan guarantees,

Text of Proposed Laws | 165

87

text of proposed laws

87

and grants for the installation of publicly accessible clean alternative fuel
infrastructure.
(e) Grants and loans to private enterprises for research involving
clean alternative fuels and clean alternative fuel vehicles in California.
(f) Other expenditures which the authority determines, by a vote of
seven or more members of the authority, represent urgent or extraordinary
opportunities involving vehicle or fuel technologies that will advance the
goal of reducing the use of petroleum transportation fuels in California
from 2005 levels by ten billion (10,000,000,000) gallons over 10 years.
26051. Based on the standards set forth in Section 26057, the
authority shall use the funds in the Research and Innovation Acceleration
Account to make grants to California universities for facilities, postbaccalaureate student research training grants, and research, performed
and located wholly on the contiguous campus of the university, to
improve the economic viability and accelerate the commercialization of
renewable energy technologies, such as solar, geothermal, wind, and wave
technologies, and energy efficiency technologies in buildings, equipment,
electricity generation, and vehicles.
26052. Based on the standards set forth in Section 26058, the
authority shall use the funds in the Commercialization Acceleration
Account to provide incentives including, but not limited to, loans, loan
guarantees, and grants to fund the one-time or start-up costs of introducing
petroleum reduction and renewable energy technologies, energy efficiency
technologies, clean alternative fuels, and clean alternative fuel vehicles
including, but not limited to, the certification of products, vehicles, and
distribution systems, and for other costs that will accelerate the production
and distribution of commercially viable products and technologies to the
market and that, preferably, will promote California-based job creation,
employment, and economic development.
26053. Based on the standards in Section 26059, the authority shall
use the funds in the Vocational Training Account to:
(a) Make grants through the Office of the Chancellor of Community
Colleges to California community colleges for staff development and
facilities to train students to work with renewable energy technologies,
energy efficiency technologies, and clean alternative fuels, in buildings,
equipment, electricity generation, and vehicles.
(b) Make grants through the Office of the Chancellor of Community
Colleges to California community colleges for tuition assistance for lowincome students and former fossil fuel energy workers and certified vehicle
mechanics to obtain training to work with renewable energy technologies,
such as solar, geothermal, wind, and wave technologies, clean alternative
fuels, and energy efficiency technologies, in buildings, equipment,
electricity generation, and vehicles.
26054. Based on the standards in Section 26060, the authority shall
use the funds in the Public Education and Administration Account to:
(a) Educate the California public regarding the importance of
energy efficiency technologies, renewable energy technologies, and full
fuel-cycle petroleum reduction.
(b) Administer the authority.
(c) Monitor the implementation of the California Energy
Independence Fund Assessment and refer any evidence that oil producers
are attempting to gouge consumers by passing the assessment on to
consumers in the form of higher prices for oil, gasoline, or diesel fuel to
the Board of Equalization for investigation.
Article 4. Standards
26055. The authority shall establish the following standards:
(a) Intellectual Property Rights. The authority shall establish
standards requiring that all research grants made pursuant to this Act shall
be subject to intellectual property agreements that balance the opportunity
of the State of California to benefit from the patents, royalties, and licenses
that result from the research with the need to assure that such research is
not unreasonably hindered by those intellectual property agreements.
(b) Oversight of Awards. The authority shall establish standards for
the oversight of all incentives including, but not limited to, grants, loans,
loan guarantees, credits, and buydowns made under this Act to ensure
compliance with all applicable terms and requirements. The standards
shall include periodic reporting, including financial and performance
audits, by all recipients of incentives, excluding individuals who receive

166 | Text of Proposed Laws

buydowns, and shall permit the authority to discontinue funding or to take
other action to ensure the purposes of this Act are being met.
26056. Standards for Gasoline and Diesel Use Reduction Account
Expenditures.
(a) The authority shall make expenditures pursuant to Section 26050
consistent with the goal of reducing the rate of petroleum consumption
in California by 25 percent within 10 years of the date of the authority’s
adoption of an initial strategic plan pursuant to this section, as compared
with California’s current sixteen billion (16,000,000,000) gallon annual
rate of consumption, or roughly four billion (4,000,000,000) gallons of
petroleum transportation fuels per year by 2017, and causing permanent
and long-term reductions in petroleum consumption in California. The total
reduction goal shall be ten billion (10,000,000,000) gallons of petroleum
transportation fuels over 10 years. Prior to making any expenditure
pursuant to Section 26050, the authority shall adopt a strategic plan
pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 26045, as follows:
(1) Within nine months of the effective date of this Act, the authority,
in consultation with the California Air Resources Board, the California
Energy Commission, and the Public Utilities Commission, shall adopt
an Integrated Resource Plan for petroleum reduction in California. The
Integrated Resource Plan shall be based on the best estimates of the
potential for unsubsidized market acceptance of technologies, products, or
services within 10 years of the date of the adoption of the initial Integrated
Resource Plan.
(2) The Integrated Resource Plan shall outline a strategy for the
allocation of funds to programs with the highest return opportunities,
using the financing powers provided to the authority by this division. The
Integrated Resource Plan shall maximize the petroleum use reduction while
considering the greenhouse gas reduction benefits of clean alternative
fuels and clean alternative fuel vehicles. The Integrated Resource Plan
shall also evaluate the expenditure of funds for clean alternative fuel
vehicles and shall consider allocating funds necessary to balance the
deployment of clean alternative fuel vehicles with accessibility to clean
alternative fuels.
(3) The Integrated Resource Plan shall be developed with input from
interested parties at scheduled public hearings of the authority under the
leadership of the Chief Executive Officer of the authority. The authority
shall update the plan every two years and shall amend the plan to ensure
that it remains consistent with California Air Resources Board regulations
and consistent with the priorities and goals of this Act.
(4) The Integrated Resource Plan shall contain an assessment
of the potential of expenditures to meet or exceed the goal of reducing
petroleum consumption by ten billion (10,000,000,000) gallons over 10
years. Expenditures shall only be made for items consistent with meeting
or exceeding this goal. Expenditures shall also be consistent with, and
shall receive priority according to their potential to meet or exceed,
the emissions targets and goals set forth in Executive Order S-3-05, as
published, and the emissions targets and goals set forth in Sections 1900,
1961, and 1961.1 of Title 13 of the California Code of Regulations, in effect
as of December 1, 2005. lf these emissions targets and goals are replaced
by more stringent emissions targets and goals prior to dissolution of the
authority, the more stringent emissions targets and goals shall be used to
establish priority for all subsequent expenditures under Section 26050.
The full fuel-cycle assessment should be applied to all fuels, including
electricity as a transportation fuel. Different methods of producing a
specific fuel may have different greenhouse gas emission reductions, and
the various methods should be duly considered in evaluating the full fuelcycle for that fuel. In the case of two vehicles with equivalent full fuel-cycle
greenhouse gas emissions, priority shall be given to that which involves
the lowest cost to the account.
(5) All expenditures made by the authority under this section shall
be consistent with the strategy outlined in the Integrated Resource Plan.
(b) All expenditures on clean alternative fuel infrastructure and
electric vehicle chargers shall be restricted to those that support clean
alternative fuel vehicles that are available for sale and are producible in
substantial volumes.
(c) Expenditures for buydowns shall be limited to 25 percent of the
total amount deposited in the Gasoline and Diesel Use Reduction Account,
unless the authority determines, by a two-thirds vote, that additional
expenditures are warranted in order to most cost-effectively achieve the
goals of this Act.

(PROPOSITION 87 CONTINUED)

(d) All expenditures made pursuant to Section 26050 shall be based
upon a competitive selection process, established pursuant to subdivision
(b) of Section 26045. Pursuant to the competitive selection process, the
authority shall, at a minimum:
(1) Ensure that the expenditure does not supplant existing state
funding for the reduction of petroleum consumption in California.
(2) Evaluate the quality of the proposal for funding, including the
availability of private matching funds, and the potential for achieving
significant results, including the level of petroleum reduction within
the state that is expected to be achieved as a result of the expenditure.
Proposals with significant business validation and leverage from private
equity funding or subordinate debt funding from private sources will be
prioritized and given preference to establish the market viability of the
proposals.
(3) Evaluate the unit cost of petroleum reduction of the proposal
and the potential of the proposal to achieve unsubsidized market
competitiveness and pervasive acceptance, adjusted for the risk and time
value of money.
(4) Evaluate the probability that the proposal will result in a
sustained, unsubsidized market-competitive technology or technologies
that can achieve substantial consumer or business acceptance beyond the
subsidy or incentive period.
(5) Ensure that the expenditure is consistent with the two-year and
ten-year strategic plans adopted by the authority.
26057. Standards for Research and Innovation Acceleration Account
Expenditures.
(a) The authority shall make expenditures pursuant to Section
26051 consistent with the goal of improving the economic viability, and
accelerating the commercialization, of renewable energy technologies,
such as solar, geothermal, wind, and wave technologies, and energy
efficiency technologies in buildings, equipment, electricity generation,
and vehicles. Prior to making any expenditures pursuant to Section 26051,
the authority shall adopt a strategic plan pursuant to subdivision (a) of
Section 26045.
(b) All expenditures made pursuant to Section 26051 shall be based
upon a competitive selection process, established pursuant to subdivision
(b) of Section 26045. Pursuant to the competitive selection process, the
authority shall, at a minimum:
(1) Ensure that the expenditure is for research in renewable energy
technologies or energy efficiency technologies.
(2) Ensure that the expenditure does not supplant existing state
funding for research in renewable energy technologies or energy
efficiency technologies and that the authority coordinates its expenditures
with other state agencies, including the Public Interest Energy Research,
Demonstration, and Development Program, established by Chapter
7.1 (commencing with Section 25620) of Division 15, to maximize the
effectiveness of the expenditures and to avoid duplication of effort.
(3) Evaluate the quality of the research proposal, the potential
for achieving significant results, including consideration of how the
expenditure will aid or result in the commercialization, or significant
and permanent deployment, of renewable energy technologies or energy
efficiency technologies in California, and the time frame for achieving that
goal.
(4) Give funding priority to research proposals that utilize more
abundant renewable energy resources and that offer the greatest potential
for technological breakthroughs. Priority shall additionally be given to
research proposals that offer the greatest potential to meet or exceed the
goals set forth in: (a) Executive Order S-3-05; (b) Sections 1900, 1961,
and 1961.1 of Title 13 of the California Code of Regulations, in effect as of
December 1, 2005; or (c) Article 16 (commencing with Section 399.11) of
Chapter 2.3 of Part 1 of Division 1 of the Public Utilities Code, in effect as
of December 1, 2005. Research proposals that offer the greatest potential
to meet or exceed the goals set forth in subdivisions (a) to (c), inclusive,
shall receive the highest priority for funding, followed by those research
proposals that offer the greatest potential to meet or exceed the targets and
goals set forth in two of subdivisions (a) to (c), inclusive, followed by those
proposals that offer the greatest potential to meet or exceed the targets and
goals set forth in one of subdivisions (a) to (c), inclusive.
(5) Ensure that all funds to support buildings and permanent facilities
pursuant to Section 26051 are committed during the first two years of the
program, and that such expenditures, in the aggregate, do not exceed

text of proposed laws
one hundred million dollars ($100,000,000). The authority shall require
all recipients of funding for facilities to pay all workers employed on the
construction or modification of the facility the general prevailing rate of
per diem wages for work of a similar character in the locality in which
work on the facility is performed and not less than the general prevailing
rate of per diem wages for holiday and overtime work fi xed as provided in
Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 1720) of Part 7 of Division 2 of the
Labor Code.
(6) Ensure that the expenditure is consistent with the two-year and
ten-year strategic plans adopted by the authority.
26058. Standards for Commercialization Acceleration Account
Expenditures.
(a) The authority shall make expenditures pursuant to Section
26052 consistent with the goal of accelerating the commercialization of
economically viable, innovative renewable energy technologies, energy
efficiency technologies, clean alternative fuels, and clean alternative
fuel vehicles in California within 10 years of the effective date of this Act,
by providing funding for the one-time or start-up costs of introducing
renewable energy technologies, energy efficiency technologies, clean
alternative fuels, and clean alternative fuel vehicles including, but not
limited to, the certification of products, vehicles, and distribution systems,
and for other costs that will accelerate the production and distribution
of commercially viable products and technologies to the market. Prior to
making any expenditures pursuant to Section 26052, the authority shall
adopt a strategic plan pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 26045.
(b) All expenditures made pursuant to Section 26052 shall be based
upon a competitive selection process, established pursuant to subdivision
(b) of Section 26045. Pursuant to the competitive selection process, the
authority shall, at a minimum:
(1) Ensure that the expenditure will advance the goal of
commercializing economically viable renewable energy technologies,
energy efficiency technologies, clean alternative fuels, or clean alternative
fuel vehicles in California.
(2) Evaluate the potential that the expenditure will achieve
significant results, including how the expenditure will aid or result in
bringing commercially viable renewable energy technologies, energy
efficiency technologies, clean alternative fuels, or clean alternative fuel
vehicles to the market in California, within a reasonable time frame from
the date of the expenditure.
(3) Establish that it is reasonably likely that a significant share of
the finished technology or product for which the funds are allocated will
be available to, or will be deployed in, California or that a significant
share of all components used in the finished technology or product will be
manufactured in California.
(4) Evaluate the cost, adjusted for time value, of energy developed
or saved by the proposal relative to its ability to advance the objectives of
the Commercialization Acceleration Account.
(5) Evaluate the probability that the proposal will result in a
sustained, unsubsidized market-competitive technology or technologies
that can achieve substantial consumer or business acceptance.
(6) Ensure that the expenditure is consistent with the two-year and
ten-year strategic plans adopted by the authority.
(c) All expenditures from the Commercialization Acceleration
Account require the recipient of the expenditure to provide matching
funds equal to at least 50 percent of the expenditure, except that in the
case of loans and loan guarantees, the recipient may provide equity
or subordinated debt equal to at least 25 percent of the loan or loan
guarantee. This constraint will not be applicable to the distribution for
a clean alternative fuel equal to approximately the first 15 percent of the
distribution of the gasoline distribution system.
(d) Any funds that remain in the account after 10 years shall be
divided equally between the Gasoline and Diesel Use Reduction Account
and the Research and Innovation Acceleration Account.
26059. Standards for Vocational Training Account Expenditures.
(a) The authority shall make expenditures pursuant to Section 26053
consistent with the goal of training students to work with renewable energy
technologies, such as solar, geothermal, wind, and wave technologies,
or energy efficiency technologies, in buildings, equipment, electricity
generation, clean alternative fuels, and clean alternative fuel vehicles.
Prior to making any expenditures pursuant to Section 26053, the authority
shall adopt a strategic plan pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 26045.

Text of Proposed Laws | 167

87

text of proposed laws
(b) All expenditures made pursuant to Section 26053 shall be based
upon a competitive selection process, established pursuant to subdivision
(b) of Section 26045. Pursuant to the competitive selection process, the
authority shall, at a minimum:
(1) Ensure that the expenditure is for training in renewable energy
technologies, energy efficiency technologies, clean alternative fuels, or
clean alternative fuel vehicles.
(2) Ensure that the expenditure does not supplant existing state
funding for training in renewable energy technologies, energy efficiency
technologies, clean alternative fuels, or clean alternative fuel vehicles.
(3) Evaluate the quality of the program, the potential for achieving
significant results, including consideration of how the expenditure will aid
or result in training workers in renewable energy technologies, energy
efficiency technologies, clean alternative fuels, or clean alternative fuel
vehicles in California, and the time frame for achieving that goal.
(4) Ensure that the expenditure is consistent with the two-year and
ten-year strategic plans adopted by the authority.
26060. Standards for Public Education and Administration Account
Expenditures.
(a) The authority shall make expenditures pursuant to Section 26054
consistent with the goal of educating the public regarding the importance
of energy efficiency technologies, renewable energy technologies, and
full life-cycle petroleum reduction, and reporting on the progress of the
program, and of efficiently administering the authority.
(b) At least 28.5 percent of the funds in the Public Education and
Administration Account shall be expended for the purpose of public
education regarding funded technologies.
Article 5. Accountability

87

26061. (a) In addition to the report required by Section 26017, the
authority shall issue an annual report to the Governor, the Legislature,
and the public which sets forth its activities, its accomplishments, and
future program directions. Each annual report shall include, but not be
limited to, the following: the number and dollar amounts of incentives
including, but not limited to, grants, loans, loan guarantees, credits, and
buydowns; the recipients of incentives for the prior year; the authority’s
administrative expenses; a summary of research findings, including
promising new research areas and technological innovations; and an
assessment of the relationship between the authority’s award of incentives
and the authority’s strategic plan.
(b) The authority shall annually commission an independent
financial audit of its activities from a certified public accountant which
shall be provided to the Controller, who shall review the audit and annually
issue a public report of that review.
(c) There shall be a Citizens’ Financial Accountability Oversight
Committee chaired by the Controller. This committee shall review the
annual financial audit and the Controller’s report and evaluation of that
audit. The Controller, the Treasurer, the President pro Tempore of the
Senate, the Speaker of the Assembly, and the chairperson of the authority
shall each appoint a public member of the committee. The committee shall
provide recommendations regarding the authority’s financial practices and
performance. The Controller shall provide staff support. The committee
shall hold a public meeting, with appropriate notice, and a formal public
comment period. The committee shall evaluate public comments and
include appropriate summaries in its annual report.
SEC. 18. Part 21 (commencing with Section 42000) is added to
Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, to read:
PART 21.

CALIFORNIA ENERGY INDEPENDENCE FUND
ASSESSMENT LAW
42000. This part shall be known and may be cited as the “California
Energy Independence Fund Assessment Law.”
42001. For purposes of this part, the following definitions shall
apply:
(a) “Authority” means the California Energy Alternatives Program
Authority, which is established in Division 16 (commencing with Section
26000) of the Public Resources Code.

168 | Text of Proposed Laws

(b) “Barrel of oil” means 42 United States gallons or 231 cubic
inches per gallon computed at a temperature of 60 degrees Fahrenheit.
(c) “Board” means the State Board of Equalization.
(d) “Consumer” means an individual, firm, partnership, association,
or corporation who buys for his, her, or its own use, or for the use of
another, but not for resale.
(e) “First purchaser” means a person who purchases oil from a
producer.
(f) “Gross value” means the sale price at the mouth of the well for
oil, including any bonus, premium, or other thing in value paid for the oil.
If oil is exchanged for something other than cash, or if there is no sale at
the time of severance, or if the relation between the buyer and the seller is
such that the consideration paid, if any, is not indicative of the true value
or market price, then the board shall determine the value of the oil subject
to the fee, based on the cash price paid to producers for like oil in the
vicinity of the well.
(g) “Oil” means petroleum, or other crude oil, condensate, casing
head gasoline, or other mineral oil that is mined, produced, or withdrawn
from below the surface of the soil or water in this state.
(h) “Producer” means any person who takes oil from the earth or
water in this state in any manner; any person who owns, controls, manages,
or leases any oil well in the earth or water of this state; any person who
produces or extracts in any manner any oil by taking it from the earth
or water in this state; any person who acquires the severed oil from a
person or agency exempt from property taxation under the Constitution
or other laws of the United States or under the Constitution or other laws
of the State of California; and any person who owns an interest, including
a royalty interest, in oil or its value, whether the oil is produced by the
person owning the interest or by another on his or her behalf by lease,
contract, or other arrangement.
(i) “Production” means the total gross amount of oil produced,
including the gross amount thereof attributable to a royalty or other
interest.
(j) “Severed” or “severing” means the extraction or withdrawing
from below the surface of the earth or water of any oil, whether extraction
or withdrawal shall be by natural flow, mechanical flow, forced flow,
pumping, or any other means employed to get the oil from below the
surface of the earth or water and shall include the withdrawing by any
means whatsoever of oil upon which the assessment has not been paid,
from any surface reservoir, natural or artificial, or from a water surface.
(k) “Stripper well” means a well that has been certified by the board
as an oil well incapable of producing an average of more than ten barrels
of oil per day during the entire taxable month. Once a well has been
certified as a stripper well, such stripper well shall remain certified as a
stripper well until the well produces an average of more than 10 barrels of
oil per day during an entire taxable month.
42002. Effective January 1, 2007, and except as provided
for in Section 42007, there is hereby imposed the California Energy
Independence Fund Assessment upon the privilege of severing oil from
the earth or water in this state for sale, transport, consumption, storage,
profit, or use. The assessment shall be borne ratably by all persons within
the term “producer” as that term is defined in subdivision (h) of Section
42001. The fee shall be applied to all portions of the gross value of each
barrel of oil severed as follows:
(a) One and one-half percent (1.5%) of the gross value of oil from
$10 to $25 per barrel.
(b) Three percent (3.0%) of the gross value of oil from $25.01 to $40
per barrel.
(c) Four and one-half percent (4.5%) of the gross value of oil from
$40.01 to $60 per barrel.
(d) Six percent (6.0%) of the gross value of oil from $60.01 per
barrel and above.
42003. Except as otherwise provided in this part, the assessment
shall be upon the entire production in this state, regardless of the place of
sale or to whom sold or by whom used, or the fact that the delivery may be
made to points outside the state.
42004. (a) Producers or purchasers of oil, or both, are authorized
and required to withhold from any payment due interested parties the
proportionate amount of the assessment due.
(b) The assessment imposed by this part is the primary liability of

(PROPOSITION 87 CONTINUED)

the producer and is a liability of the first purchaser and each subsequent
purchaser. Failure of the producer to pay the assessment does not relieve
the first purchaser or a subsequent purchaser from liability for the
assessement. A purchaser of oil produced in this state shall satisfy himself
or herself that the assessment on that oil has been or will be paid by the
person liable for the assessment.
(c) The assessment imposed by this part shall not be passed on to
consumers through higher prices for oil, gasoline, or diesel fuel. At the
request of the authority, the board shall investigate whether a producer,
first purchaser, or subsequent purchaser has attempted to gouge consumers
by using the assessment as a pretext to materially raise the price of oil,
gasoline, or diesel fuel.
42005. The assessment imposed by this part shall be in addition to
any ad valorem taxes imposed by the state, or any of its political subdivisions,
or any local business license taxes which may be incurred as a privilege of
severing oil from the earth or doing business in that locality. No equipment,
material, or property shall be exempt from payment of ad valorem tax by
reason of the payment of the gross tax pursuant to this part.
42006. Two or more producers that are corporations and are
commonly owned or controlled directly or indirectly, as defined in Section
25105, by the same interests, shall be considered as a single producer for
purposes of application of the assessment prescribed by this part.
42007. The California Energy Independence Fund Assessment
imposed pursuant to this part does not apply to:
(a) Oil owned or produced by any political subdivision of the state,
including that political subdivision’s proprietary share of oil produced
under any unit, cooperative, or other pooling agreement.
(b) Oil produced by a stripper well in any month in which the average
value of oil is less than $50 per barrel. If in any month the average value of
oil is $50.01 or more per barrel, a stripper well shall be subject to a fee in
the amount of 3 percent of the gross value of oil above $50.01.
42008. The assessment imposed by this part shall be due and
payable to the board on a monthly basis. The board has broad discretion in
administering this part and may prescribe the manner in which all payments
are made to the state under this part, and the board may prescribe the forms
and reporting requirements as necessary to implement the assessment,
including, but not limited to, information regarding the location of the
well by county, the gross amount of oil produced, the price paid therefor,
the prevailing market price of oil, and the amount of assessment due. The
board may employ auditors, investigators, engineers, and other persons
to engage in all activities necessary for the implementation of this part,
including to verify reports and investigate the affairs of producers and
purchasers to determine whether the assessment imposed by this part is
properly reported and paid. In all proceedings under this part, the board
may act on behalf of the people of the State of California.
42009. The board shall enforce the provisions of this part and may
prescribe, adopt, and enforce rules and regulations, including, but not
limited to, the payment of interest, the imposition of penalties, and any
other action permitted by Sections 6451 to 7176, inclusive, or Sections
38401 to 38901, inclusive, whichever are most applicable as determined
by the board, relating to the application, administration, and enforcement
of this part.
42010. (a) All assessments, interest, penalties, and other amounts
collected pursuant to this part shall be deposited in the California Energy
Independence Fund, which is established by Article XXXVI of the California
Constitution. Before allocating funds pursuant to subdivision (a) or (b) of
Section 26049 of the Public Resources Code, the authority shall reimburse
the board for expenses incurred in the administration and collection of the
assessment imposed by this part. The board shall transfer moneys received
from the aforementioned sources to the California Energy Independence
Fund at least once per calendar month.
(b) This part shall become inoperative after the authority has
expended four billion dollars ($4,000,000,000) pursuant to subdivision (d)
of Section 26045 of the Public Resources Code and after all indebtedness
associated with the Clean Alternative Energy Act, including principal,
interest, ancillary obligations, and other costs of any bonds issued
pursuant to Division 16 (commencing with Section 26000) of the Public
Resources Code, secured by a pledge of the assessment created by this part,
has been paid or payment has been provided for, unless a later enacted
statute, that becomes operative on or before the date this part becomes
inoperative, deletes or extends the date on which it becomes inoperative.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, so long as any bonds or other obligations

text of proposed laws
secured by the assessment created by this part remain outstanding, neither
the Legislature nor the people may reduce or eliminate the assessment,
and this pledge may be included in the proceedings of any such bonds as a
covenant with the holders of such bonds.
SEC. 19. LEGAL CHALLENGE.
Any challenge to the validity of this Act must be filed within six
months of the effective date of this Act.
SEC. 20. AMENDMENT.
The statutory provisions of this Act may be amended to carry out its
purpose and intent by statutes approved by a two-thirds vote of each house
of the Legislature and signed by the Governor.
SEC. 21. SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of this Act or the application thereof to any person or
circumstances is held invalid, including subdivision (c) of Section 42004
of the Revenue and Taxation Code and subdivision (c) of Section 26054 of
the Public Resources Code, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions
or applications of this Act which can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Act are
severable.
SEC. 22. CONFLICTING INITIATIVES.
In the event that this measure and another initiative measure or
measures that impose an assessment, royalty, tax, or fee on the extraction
of oil or that involve petroleum reduction shall appear on the same
statewide election ballot, the provisions of the other measure or measures
shall be deemed to be in conflict with this measure. In the event that this
measure receives a greater number of affi rmative votes, the provisions of
this measure shall prevail in their entirety, and the provisions of the other
measure shall be null and void.

PROPOSITION 88
This initiative measure is submitted to the people in accordance with
the provisions of Section 8 of Article II of the California Constitution.
This initiative measure expressly amends the California Constitution
by adding sections thereto; and amends a section of the Government Code,
and adds sections to the Education Code; therefore, new provisions proposed
to be added are printed in italic type to indicate that they are new.
PROPOSED LAW
SECTION 1. Title
This measure shall be known and may be cited as the Classroom
Learning and Accountability Act.
SEC. 2. Findings and Declaration of Purpose
The People of the State of California fi nd and declare that:
(a) California students are falling behind, ranking among the bottom
six states in reading and math. In the nation’s five biggest states, only
California students score below average on every national assessment of
educational progress.
(b) Independent research indicates that California’s poor student
achievement is caused, in part, by inadequate resources for public
education, including low funding levels, high class sizes, inadequate
facilities, and students with relatively greater needs. Education funding
in California is chronically below the national average, even though
California students are expected to meet some of the highest academic
standards in the country.
(c) California’s economic and social prosperity depend on a welleducated workforce capable of competing in a global economy.
(d) In order to improve student achievement, new investment is
needed to reduce class sizes, provide textbooks and other instructional
materials, improve campus safety, and provide facilities for high-quality
public charter schools with greater parental and community involvement.
(e) A parcel assessment for public schools will raise needed funds for
student achievement, while protecting property owners against runaway
taxes —especially seniors with fi xed incomes. Parcel assessments have
been approved by voters in dozens of California communities, and they are
consistent with Proposition 13 of 1978.

Text of Proposed Laws | 169

87
88

text of proposed laws

88

(f) New funding for public education must come with safeguards
against waste and mismanagement. The entirety of the Classroom
Learning and Accountability Fund will be subject to oversight and annual
independent audits. Annual audits will ensure that every penny goes into
classrooms and student learning, where it is needed most.
(g) The Legislature is expressly prohibited from using money
from the Fund to supplant other funding or redirect money to other, less
critical needs. This act specifies that the Fund shall not be used to pay
administrative overhead. Misuse of funds will result in criminal penalties,
loss of credentials, and/or fi nes.
(h) Money from the Fund will be used to collect information that
will evaluate the effectiveness of specific educational programs and
investments. Schools, researchers, and other agencies will be better able
to analyze the link between specific investments and the impact on student
achievement.
(i) Homeowners 65 years of age or older are fully exempted from the
provisions of this act. Senior citizens will not be burdened by the creation
of the Fund.
(j) This act pays for itself. The Fund will improve education without
affecting any state services or programs currently supported by the state
General Fund.
Therefore, the People of the State of California hereby adopt the
Classroom Learning and Accountability Act.
SEC. 3. Section 6.2 is added to Article IX of the Constitution of the
State of California, to read:
SEC. 6.2. (a) The Classroom Learning and Accountability Fund
is hereby created in the State Treasury to be held in trust for the purposes
set forth below and is continuously appropriated for the support of
kindergarten through 12th grade educational programs.
(b) Classroom Learning and Accountability Funds shall not be used
to pay for administrative overhead and shall be used for the following
educational purposes only:
(1) One hundred seventy-five million dollars ($175,000,000) to
reduce class sizes in kindergarten and grades 1 to 12, inclusive.
(2) One hundred million dollars ($100,000,000) for textbooks and
other instructional materials approved by the State Board of Education
as consistent with the state curriculum frameworks and academically
rigorous content standards.
(3) One hundred million dollars ($100,000,000) to enhance the
safety and security of pupils, teachers, and school staff through school
community policing, gang-risk intervention, afterschool and intersession
student support and development, and school community violence
prevention.
(4) Eighty-five million dollars ($85,000,000) for academic success
facility grants to any qualifying school district which has not received
funding from the proceeds of a state general obligation bond for school
construction or modernization. A school district receiving an academic
success facility grant shall not be eligible for funding from the proceeds of
a state general obligation bond for school construction or modernization
unless the law authorizing the bond and approved by a vote of the people
expressly provides that eligibility.
(5) Ten million dollars ($10,000,000) for an integrated longitudinal
teacher and pupil achievement data system that provides a better means
of evaluating the efficiency and effectiveness of educational programs and
investments.
(c) The amounts deposited in the Classroom Learning and
Accountability Fund shall be used exclusively for the purposes set forth
in this section. All moneys in the Classroom Learning and Accountability
Fund shall be used to supplement and not supplant federal, state, or local
funds used for educational programs. The Legislature shall set penalties,
including loss of credentials and/or fines, for school districts, county
offices of education, public charter schools, and any administrator that
misuses funds appropriated and allocated pursuant to this section.
(d) Funds appropriated pursuant to paragraphs (1) to (3), inclusive,
of subdivision (b) shall be apportioned directly to school districts, county
offices of education, and public charter schools on a per-pupil basis. Using
variables and data that are objective, measurable, and auditable, the
Legislature shall weight the per-pupil allocation to account for differential
pupil-level costs associated with achieving state and federal achievement

170 | Text of Proposed Laws

standards based on disabilities, English proficiency, or socioeconomic
status.
(e) The allocation of funds under subdivision (b) shall be adjusted
annually on a proportional basis to reflect actual revenues received and
interest earned.
(f) None of the provisions of this section shall alter or affect any
right to equal protection provided by this Constitution.
SEC. 4. Section 21.5 is added to Article XIII A of the Constitution
of the State of California, to read:
SEC. 21.5. (a) An assessment of fi fty dollars ($50) shall be levied
on each real property parcel that is not otherwise exempt from property
taxation pursuant to this Article. The assessment shall be collected annually
at the same time and in the same manner as the ad valorem property tax.
(b) A parcel shall be exempt from the assessment described in this
section if the owner of the parcel (1) resides on the parcel, (2) is eligible
for the homeowner’s exemption under subdivision (k) of Section 3 of
Article XIII, and (3) is either a person 65 years of age or older, or is a
severely and permanently disabled person as that term is defined by the
Revenue and Taxation Code.
(c) For purposes of this section, “parcel” means any unit of real
property in the State that receives a separate tax bill for ad valorem
property taxes. Any property that is otherwise exempt from, or on which is
levied, no ad valorem property taxes in any year shall also be exempt from
the parcel tax levied by this section in that year.
(d) Each fiscal year, the revenue generated by the assessment
described in this section shall be calculated and transferred as follows:
(1) No more than two tenths of one percent (.002) shall be
appropriated to counties for the purpose of defraying the costs incurred in
implementing this section.
(2) The amount necessary to offset any decrease in state personal
and corporate income tax revenues caused by increased deductions taken
as a result of the assessments described by this section shall be transferred
to the state General Fund.
(3) After the transfer of the amounts calculated in paragraphs
(1) and (2), the remainder, including any interest earned thereon, shall
be transferred to the Classroom Learning and Accountability Fund
established by Section 6.2 of Article IX.
SEC. 5. Section 14 is added to Article XIII B of the Constitution of
the State of California, to read:
SEC. 14. (a) “Appropriations subject to limitation” of each entity
of government shall not include appropriations of revenue from the
Classroom Learning and Accountability Fund established by Section 6.2
of Article IX. No adjustment in the appropriations limit of any entity of
government shall be required pursuant to Section 3 as a result of revenue
being deposited in or appropriated from the Classroom Learning and
Accountability Fund.
(b) For purposes of this article, “proceeds of taxes” shall not include
the revenues derived from the taxes imposed pursuant to Section 21.5 of
Article XIII A, but shall include those revenues described in paragraph (2)
of subdivision (d) of Section 21.5 of Article XIII A.
SEC. 6. Section 8.3 is added to Article XVI of the Constitution of
the State of California, to read:
SEC. 8.3. (a) With the exception of the revenue described in
paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of Section 21.5 of Article XIII A, revenues
derived from the taxes imposed by Section 21.5 of Article XIII A shall not be
deemed to be “General Fund revenues which may be appropriated pursuant
to Article XIII B” as that phrase is used in paragraph (1) of subdivision
(b) of Section 8 nor shall they be considered in the determination of “per
capita General Fund revenues” as that term is used in paragraph (3) of
subdivision (b) and in subdivision (e) of Section 8.
(b) Funds appropriated pursuant to Section 6.2 of Article IX shall not
be deemed to be part of “total allocations to school districts and community
college districts from General Fund proceeds of taxes appropriated
pursuant to Article XIII B” as that phrase is used in paragraphs (2) and
(3) of subdivision (b) of Section 8.
SEC. 7. Section 14003 is added to the Education Code, to read:
14003. No moneys distributed from the Classroom Learning and
Accountability Fund shall be included in calculating and apportioning
funds as provided in Section 2558, 42238, or 56836.08. Nor shall moneys

(PROPOSITION 88 CONTINUED)

distributed from the Classroom Learning and Accountability Fund be
included in a school district’s expenditures pursuant to Section 33128.
With the exception of funds for academic success facility grants described
in Section 52057.1, the Controller shall distribute the revenues in the
Classroom Learning and Accountability Fund at least twice during the
fiscal year.
SEC. 8. Section 41020.4 is added to the Education Code, to read:
41020.4. Each fiscal year, every school district shall provide for
an annual independent audit of the moneys received from the Classroom
Learning and Accountability Fund. The audit may be prepared as part of
any annual audit already required, but it shall show how moneys received
from the Classroom Learning and Accountability Fund were spent by
category and program. The audit shall be reviewed by the applicable
county superintendent of schools and the Superintendent of Public
Instruction who shall, along with the school district, post the audit reports
on their web sites.
SEC. 9. Section 52057.1 is added to the Education Code, to read:
52057.1. (a) It is the intent of this section that facility grants for
school districts be directed towards all eligible schools, including charter
schools. Therefore, funds for academic success facility grants appropriated
pursuant to paragraph (4) of subdivision (b) of Section 6.2 of Article IX
of the California Constitution shall be apportioned directly to qualifying
school districts as defined by this section.
(b) For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
(1) A “qualifying school district” is an academically successful
eligible charter school or a school district with one or more academically
successful schools other than eligible charter schools. Neither a school
district that is formed pursuant to Chapters 3 (commencing with
Section 35500) or Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 35700) of Part 21,
and whose former districts received funding from the proceeds of a state
general obligation bond for school construction or modernization, nor a
county office of education is a “qualifying school district.”
(2) An “academically successful school” is a school ranked in deciles
6 to 10, inclusive, on the Academic Performance Index when compared to
similar schools as reported for the prior academic year by the State Board
of Education.
(3) An “eligible charter school” is a charter school operated and
governed by or as a nonprofit public benefit corporation, formed and
organized pursuant to the applicable nonprofit public benefit corporation
law, where the majority of the certificated teachers at the school are
employees of the nonprofit corporation.
(c) Academic success facility grants shall be distributed to qualifying
school districts at the time of the second principal apportionment in the
form of general purpose funding. Subject to subdivision (d), academic
success facility grants shall be five hundred dollars ($500) per pupil
and shall be awarded on a per-pupil basis for each pupil enrolled in
an academically successful school, provided, however, that pupils in
academically successful eligible charter schools shall not be counted
in calculating the amount of any academic success facility grant that is
distributed to a school district.
(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (c), if at the time of the second
principal apportionment there are insufficient moneys in that portion of the
Classroom Learning and Accountability Fund described by paragraph (4)
of subdivision (6) of Section 6.2 of Article IX of the California Constitution
to provide for the per-pupil allocation specified in subdivision (c), the perpupil allocation shall be adjusted on a proportional basis to ensure that
all qualifying school districts receive an academic success facility grant in
an equal amount per pupil.
(e) Any moneys remaining in that portion of the Classroom Learning
and Accountability Fund described by paragraph (4) of subdivision (b) of
Section 6.2 of Article IX of the California Constitution after apportionment
of funds for academic success facility grants as required by this section
shall remain in the Classroom Learning and Accountability Fund and shall
be available for distribution to qualifying school districts in the following
year.
SEC. 10. Section 60901 is added to the Education Code, to read:
60901. Each school district shall participate in the collection and
reporting of data necessary for the creation and maintenance of the state’s
integrated longitudinal teacher and pupil data system as defined by the
Legislature and described in paragraph (5) of subdivision (b) of Section

text of proposed laws
6.2 of Article IX of the California Constitution.
SEC. 11. Section 13340 of the Government Code is amended to
read:
13340. (a) Except as provided in subdivision (b), on and after
July 1, 2007, no moneys in any fund that, by any statute other than a Budget
Act, are continuously appropriated without regard to fiscal years, may be
encumbered unless the Legislature, by statute, specifies that the moneys in
the fund are appropriated for encumbrance.
(b) Subdivision (a) does not apply to any of the following:
(1) The scheduled disbursement of any local sales and use tax
proceeds to an entity of local government pursuant to Part 1.5 (commencing
with Section 7200) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.
(2) The scheduled disbursement of any transactions and use tax
proceeds to an entity of local government pursuant to Part 1.6 (commencing
with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.
(3) The scheduled disbursement of any funds by a state or local
agency or department that issues bonds and administers related programs
for which funds are continuously appropriated as of June 30, 2007.
(4) Moneys that are deposited in proprietary or fiduciary funds of the
California State University and that are continuously appropriated without
regard to fiscal years.
(5) The scheduled disbursement of any motor vehicle license fee
revenues to an entity of local government pursuant to the Vehicle License
Fee Law (Part 5 (commencing with Section 10701) of Division 2 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code).
(6) Moneys that are deposited in the Classroom Learning and
Accountability Fund.
SEC. 12. Severability
The provisions of this measure are severable. If any provision of this
measure or its application is held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect
other provisions or applications that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.
SEC. 13. Amendment
This act shall be broadly construed to accomplish its purposes.
Any of the statutory provisions of this act may be amended by a bill that
complies with the single-subject rule expressed in Section 9 of Article IV
of the California Constitution, and that is passed by a two-thirds vote of
the Legislature and signed by the Governor, so long as the amendments are
consistent with and further the intent of this act.
SEC. 14. Effective Date
This initiative shall go into effect on July 1, 2007.

PROPOSITION 89
This initiative measure is submitted to the people in accordance with
the provisions of Section 8 of Article II of the California Constitution.
This initiative measure amends, repeals, and adds sections to the
Elections Code, the Government Code, and the Revenue and Taxation
Code; therefore, existing provisions proposed to be deleted are printed
in strikeout type and new provisions proposed to be added are printed in
italic type to indicate that they are new.
PROPOSED LAW

CALIFORNIA NURSES CLEAN MONEY AND FAIR
ELECTIONS ACT OF 2006
SECTION 1. Chapter 12 (commencing with Section 91015) is added
to Title 9 of the Government Code, to read:

CHAPTER 12. CALIFORNIA CLEAN MONEY AND FAIR
ELECTIONS ACT OF 2006
Article 1.

General

91015. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the
California Clean Money and Fair Elections Act of 2006.

Text of Proposed Laws | 171

88
89

text of proposed laws

89

91017. The people find and declare all of the following:
(a) The constitutional system of popular governance of the State of
California is in serious jeopardy. The health of the state’s democracy has
been undermined by the state’s campaign finance rules. Current regulation
of campaign finance practices in California is insufficient. Nearly
60 percent of Californians have expressed their concern that California’s
campaign finance system needs major changes.
(b) The increasing costs of political campaigns have forced
candidates to raise a larger percentage of their campaign funds from
special interests that have a specific financial or commercial stake in the
outcome of the elections.
(c) Unlimited corporate-funded election-related spending and
unlimited contributions to ballot measure and general purpose committees
controlled by California elected officials and candidates are leading to
corruption, or the appearance of corruption, of the election process, have
produced corrosive and distorting effects on the electoral process, and
have created a loss of public confidence in the fairness of the electoral
process.
(d) Corruption and the appearance of corruption is a major problem
in California politics.
Large campaign contributors and spenders are able to buy access
to California’s elected officials, thereby unduly influencing the legislative
and executive agenda and policy choices. At the very least, there is a
troublesome appearance of corruption when, for example, the Governor
sponsors a $500,000 per plate dinner with bond traders to raise funds
supporting a bond-related ballot measure. Californians fear that in some
instances large contributions are given to secure a political quid pro quo
from current and potential officeholders.
(e) The current campaign finance system burdens candidates with
the incessant rigors of fundraising and thus decreases the time available
to carry out their public responsibilities.
(f) The current campaign finance system diminishes the free speech
rights of a majority of voters and candidates whose voices are drowned out
by corporations with unlimited funds to expend for monopolizing the arena
of paid political communications to further their own private commercial
interests.
(g) The current campaign finance system fuels the public perception
of corruption at worst and conflict of interest at best and undermines public
confidence in the democratic process and democratic institutions.
(h) The ever-increasing costs of political campaigns in competitive
races force most candidates to raise larger and larger percentages of their
campaign funds from interest groups that have a specific financial stake in
the outcome of the elections and in matters before our state government.
(i) Existing term limits place a greater demand on fundraising for
the next election even for elected officials in safe seats.
(j) The rapidly increasing amounts of independent expenditures
point to a growing trend of special interest groups to fund independent
expenditures in an effort to skirt the contribution laws.
(k) The current campaign finance system undermines the First
Amendment right of voters and candidates to be heard in the political
process, undermines the First Amendment right of voters to hear all
candidates’ speech, and undermines the core First Amendment value of
open and robust debate in the political process.
(l) The number of candidates and issues attracting campaign
contributions varies widely among candidate races. The costs in some
election races are minimal while others draw expenditures in excess
of one million dollars ($1,000,000). This act addresses the range of
competitive election races by providing smaller amounts of public funds
in noncompetitive races and much larger amounts in competitive contests.
As a result, the act saves the taxpayers of California from unnecessarily
expending large amounts of public funds.
(m) In states where the clean money and clean election laws have
been enacted and used, election results show that more individuals,
especially women and minorities, run as candidates; voter turnout
increases and overall campaign costs decrease.
(n) The current campaign finance system creates a danger of actual
corruption by encouraging elected officials to take funds from private
interests that are directly affected by governmental actions.
(o) Under the state’s current campaign finance rules, contributors

172 | Text of Proposed Laws

may secure that political quid pro quo by making unlimited contributions
to ballot measure and general purpose committees controlled, formally
or informally, by candidates and state elected officials. More than
$84 million has poured into these committees since 1990, much of it from
large corporate contributors, from those with important business with the
state, and from wealthy contributors whose financial interests are affected
by state decisions.
(p) Powerful corporate and commercial interests have transformed
initiative and referendum campaigns into a new arena for gaining
commercial advantage and exploiting business opportunities at the
expense of the public interest and welfare. Hundreds of millions of dollars
are spent by corporate business interests in the initiative and referendum
process to advance private, self-interested business plans, deregulate
legal protections preserving the public health and welfare, and disable
governmental institutions and programs essential to popular governance
in the interests of the people. Established by the voters in 1911 as a means
of curtailing the political influence of corporate interests, the initiative
process now primarily serves corporate and commercial interests.
(q) Candidate elections and ballot measure elections in California
are intertwined, not separate events. California state candidates,
officeholders, and political parties often endorse, oppose, and actively
campaign for and against ballot measures, and use those measures as
part of an overall electoral strategy. Thus, the potential for candidate
corruption and the appearance of corruption exists in all ballot measure
campaigns in California.
(r) Campaign-related spending by business corporations is
especially corrupting because of its corrosive and distorting effects. The
immense aggregations of wealth that are accumulated with the help of the
corporate form have little or no correlation to the public’s support for the
corporation’s political ideas, and corporations should not be allowed to
exert an undue influence on the outcome of candidate and ballot measure
elections. Nearly 80 percent of Californians have complained that business
corporations have too much influence on candidate elections and ballot
initiatives.
(s) California’s existing campaign finance rules that permit
unchecked corporate spending are also undermining the public’s
confidence in the election process. A majority of Californians believe that
campaign contributions are having a negative effect on the public policy
made by state officials in Sacramento. Nearly 8 in 10 California voters say
that their state government is run by a few big interests, and 92 percent of
California voters believe the initiative process is controlled “some” or “a
lot” by special interests.
(t) Corporate spending in the election process exerts an undue
influence on the outcome of the vote, and —in the end—destroys the
confidence of the people in the democratic process and in the integrity
of government. Corporate advocacy threatens imminently to undermine
democratic processes, thereby denigrating rather than serving First
Amendment interests. However, contributions or expenditures by certain
nonprofit organizations do not present these same dangers.
(u) Of particular concern are social science studies proving that
large spending by corporations in ballot measure campaigns is very
successful in blocking ballot measures that are otherwise popularly
supported by the voters.
(v) Limits on corporate election-related spending and on
contributions to candidate-controlled ballot measure committees do
not violate the First Amendment. The Supreme Court has recognized
that restrictions on direct corporate contributions and expenditures are
constitutional when necessary to preserve voter confidence in the election
process, to prevent candidate corruption or the appearance of corruption,
or to prevent the distorting effect of corporate campaign contributions
and expenditures. The Supreme Court has also recently recognized that
corporate contributions are furthest from the core of political expression,
since corporations’ First Amendment speech and association interests are
derived largely from those of their members and of the public in receiving
information. Limits on direct corporate contributions leave individual
officers, employees, and members of corporations free to make their
own political contributions, and therefore deprive the public of little or
no material information. The same rationale applies to restrictions on
corporate political expenditures.
(w) Experience in the federal election process regarding the
emergence of “sham issue advocacy” leads California voters to anticipate

(PROPOSITION 89 CONTINUED)

that corporations will attempt to circumvent any new limits on corporate
express advocacy in candidate and ballot measure elections through the
use of campaign advertising that avoids the “magic words” of express
advocacy. A bright-line “electioneering communications” provision is
therefore necessary to prevent corporations from exploiting a loophole in
the law that would allow unlimited corporate spending on election-related
campaign advertising.
(x) California’s initiative process was established to enable
individual citizens to join together to act as lawmakers when elected
officials are too beholden to corporate interests to take action on matters
of public safety and necessity. Thus the initiative process was intended to
provide citizens with a collective opportunity to make their views known
and voices heard, so as to engage in self-government, when the views of
corporate interests predominate in the Legislature. Corporations are not
humans; they are creatures of the state that are licensed upon agreement
to comply with the norms of conduct imposed upon them, in exchange for
which they are accorded the right to do business in the state and numerous
other privileges.
(y) Through the use of money, corporations have come to exercise
enormous influence, and often outright control, over the actions of the
executive and legislative branches in California. Money from various
corporate interests has effectively paralyzed the Legislature from enacting
laws that would protect the public. Similarly, through their use of their
financial resources, corporations now overwhelmingly dominate the
initiative process, either to prevent citizens from effectively exercising
their right to promote ballot initiatives, or to enact legislation that the
Legislature, paralyzed by competing special interests, will not enact.
Indeed, business corporations now routinely employ “counter initiatives”
designed not to pass the measures themselves, but to discourage voters
from supporting or even voting upon citizen-sponsored ballot measures
that the corporations oppose. Finally, elected officials and candidates for
public office have begun to utilize the initiative process to both solicit funds
from corporations whose financial interests would be served by proposed
initiative legislation, and to escape the more stringent rules governing
contributions to candidates for public office.
91019. The people enact this chapter to accomplish the following
purposes:
(a) To reduce the influence of large contributions on the decisions
made by state government.
(b) To remove wealth as a major factor affecting whether an
individual chooses to become a candidate.
(c) To provide a greater diversity of candidates to participate in the
electoral process.
(d) To reverse the escalating cost of elections that have increased far
beyond the rate of inflation.
(e) To permit candidates to pursue policy issues instead of being
preoccupied with fundraising and allow officeholders to spend more time
carrying out their public duties.
(f) To diminish the danger of actual corruption and the public
perception of corruption and strengthen public confidence in the
governmental and election processes.
(g) To ensure that independent expenditures are not used to evade
contribution limits.
(h) To foster more equal and meaningful participation in the
political process.
(i) To provide candidates who participate in the Clean Money
program with sufficient resources with which to communicate with voters.
(j) To increase the accountability of each elected official to the
constituents who elect him or her, as opposed to the contributors who fund
his or her campaigns.
(k) To provide voters with timely information regarding the sources
of campaign contributions, expenditures, and political advertising.
(l) To prevent corruption, the appearance of corruption, and a
decline in voter confidence in the integrity of the electoral and political
process by imposing reasonable limits on contributions made to ballot
measure committees controlled formally or informally by candidates.
(m) To prevent the distorting effect of campaign contributions and
expenditures by business corporations, which threaten imminently to
undermine the democratic process, and to restore the confidence of the

text of proposed laws
people in the electoral process and in the integrity of government, by
requiring that corporations desiring to engage in election-related spending
in California do so through separate segregated funds that protect their
First Amendment rights.
(n) To limit the opportunity for circumvention of important
campaign finance rules enacted to avoid corruption, the appearance
of corruption, distortion of the political process, and a decline in voter
confidence by adopting reasonable restrictions governing electioneering
communications, aggregate contribution limits, and inter-candidate and
inter-committee transfers of campaign funds.
Article 2. Applicability to the Political Reform Act of 1974
91023. Unless specifically superseded by provisions of this chapter,
the definitions and provisions of Chapters 1 to 11, inclusive, of this title (the
Political Reform Act), shall govern the interpretation of this chapter.
Article 3.

Definitions

91025. For purposes of the contribution limits of this chapter:
(a) The contributions of an entity whose contributions are directed
and controlled by any individual shall be aggregated with contributions
made by that individual and any other entity whose contributions are
directed and controlled by the same individual.
(b) If two or more entities make contributions that are directed and
controlled by a majority of the same persons, the contributions of those
entities shall be aggregated.
(c) Contributions made by entities that are majority-owned by any
person shall be aggregated with the contributions of the majority owner
and all other entities majority-owned by that person, unless those entities
act independently in their decisions to make contributions.
91027. “Coordination” means a payment made for a communication
or anything of value that is for the purpose of influencing the outcome of
an election for elective state office and that is made by any one or more of
the following methods:
(a) By a person in cooperation, consultation, or concert with, at the
request or suggestion of, or pursuant to a particular understanding with,
a candidate, a candidate’s controlled committee, or an agent acting on
behalf of a candidate or a controlled committee.
(b) Based on specific information about the candidate’s plans,
projects, or needs provided to the person making the payment by the
candidate or the candidate’s agent who provides the information with a
view toward having the payment made.
(c) By a person if, in the same primary or general election in
which the payment is made, the person making the payment is serving as
a member, employee, fundraiser, or agent of the candidate’s controlled
committee in an executive or policymaking position.
91028. “District” means:
(a) In the case of an election for the Legislature or the Board of
Equalization, the numeric district in which the candidate is seeking
office.
(b) In the case of an election for statewide elective office, the State
of California.
91029. “Entity” means any person other than an individual.
91031. “Excess expenditure amount” means the amount of funds
spent or obligated to be spent by a nonparticipating candidate in excess of
the Clean Money amount available to a participating candidate running
for the same office. If a participating candidate has made the choice
specified in subdivision (c) of Section 91097 in an election where there
is more than one participating candidate, then the Clean Money amount
available to the participating candidate shall be considered to be the
actual amount paid by the Clean Money Fund to the candidate for that
primary or general election period, including any increase or decrease
effected by the choice.
91033. “Exploratory period” means the period beginning 18 months
before the primary election and ending on the last day of the qualifying
period. The exploratory period begins before, but extends to the end of,
the qualifying period.
91035. “General election campaign period” means the period

Text of Proposed Laws | 173

89

text of proposed laws

89

beginning the day after the primary election and ending on the day of the
general election.
91037. “Independent candidate” means a candidate for elective
state office who does not represent a political party that has been granted
ballot status for the general election and who has qualified to be on the
general election ballot.
91041. “Majority-owned” means an ownership of 50 percent or
more.
91043. “Nonparticipating candidate” means a candidate for
elective state office who is on the ballot but has chosen not to apply for
Clean Money campaign funding and a candidate who is on the ballot and
has applied but has not satisfied the requirements for receiving Clean
Money funding.
91045. “Office-qualified party” means a party whose gubernatorial
nominee has received 10 percent or more of the votes at the last election
or whose candidate for the same elective state office in the same district,
whether statewide or legislative, as the current candidate seeking Clean
Money funding received 10 percent or more of the votes at the last
election.
91046. “Office-qualified candidate” is a candidate seeking
nomination for an elective state office from an office-qualified party.
91047. “One party dominant legislative district” is a district in
which the number of registered voters for the party with the highest number
of registered voters exceeds the number of registered voters for each of the
other parties by an amount no less than 20 percent of the total number of
registered voters in the district.
91047.5. “Paid Circulator,” for the purpose of collecting qualifying
contributions and as used in this chapter, means any person who is
compensated with money or anything of value for collecting qualifying
contributions. This definition shall not include a full-time campaign staff
member who spends no more than 20 percent of his or her time gathering
qualifying contributions. “Compensation,” for purposes of this chapter,
means any economic consideration, including payments on the basis of the
number of qualifying contributions gathered. “Compensation” does not
include reimbursement of reasonable travel expenses such as expenses for
transportation plus a reasonable sum for food and lodging.
91049. “Participating candidate” means a candidate for elective
state office who qualifies for Clean Money campaign funding. These
candidates are eligible to receive Clean Money funding during primary
and general election campaign periods.
91051. “Party candidate” means a candidate for elective state office
who represents a political party that has been granted ballot status and
holds a primary election to choose its nominee for the general election.
91053. “Performance-qualified candidate” means a candidate
for elective state office who has either won the primary nomination of
an office-qualified party or shown a broad base of support by gathering
twice the number of qualifying contributions as is required for an officequalified candidate. Independent candidates may qualify for funding as
performance-qualified candidates.
91054. “Person” means an individual, proprietorship, firm,
partnership, joint venture, syndicate, business trust, company,
corporation, limited liability company, association, committee, or any
other organization or group of persons acting in concert.
91055. “Petty cash” means cash amounts of one hundred dollars
($100) or less per day that are not drawn on the Clean Money Debit Card
and used to pay expenses of no more than twenty-five dollars ($25) each.
91057. “Political party committee” means the state central
committee or county central committee of an organization that meets the
requirements for recognition as a political party pursuant to Section 5100
of the Elections Code.
91059. “Primary election campaign period” means the period
beginning 120 days before the primary election and ending on the day the
primary election results are certified for all candidates for the relevant
elective state office.
91061. “Qualified candidate” means a candidate seeking
nomination for an elective state office from a party that is not an officequalified party.
91063. “Qualifying contribution” means a contribution of
five dollars ($5) that is received during the designated qualifying period
by a candidate for elective state office seeking to become eligible for Clean
Money campaign funding from a legal resident of the district in which the

174 | Text of Proposed Laws

candidate is running for office.
91065. “Qualifying period” means the period during which
candidates for elective state office are permitted to collect qualifying
contributions in order to qualify for Clean Money funding. It begins 270
days before the primary election and ends 90 days before the day of the
primary election for qualified party candidates and begins any time after
January 1 of the election year and lasts 180 days but in no event ending
later than 90 days before the general election for performance-qualified
candidates who are running as independent candidates.
91067. “Seed money contribution” means a contribution of no more
than one hundred dollars ($100) made by a legal resident of California
during the exploratory period.
91069. “Small contributor committee” means any committee that
meets all of the following criteria:
(a) The committee has been in existence for at least six months.
(b) The committee has received contributions from 100 or more
persons.
(c) No person has contributed to the committee more than two
hundred dollars ($200) per calendar year.
(d) The committee makes contributions to five or more candidates
for elective state office.
(e) The committee is not a candidate-controlled committee pursuant
to Section 82016.
Article 4.

Clean Money

91071. (a) An office-qualified candidate for elective state office
qualifies as a participating candidate for the primary election campaign
period if the following requirements are met:
(1) The candidate files a declaration with the Commission that the
candidate has complied and will comply with all of the requirements of this
act, including the requirement that during the exploratory period and the
qualifying period the candidate not accept or spend private contributions
from any source other than seed money contributions, Clean Money funds,
and political party funds as specified in Section 91123.
(2) The candidate meets the following qualifying contribution
requirements before the close of the qualifying period:
(A) The office-qualified party candidate collects at least the following
number of qualifying contributions:
(i) Seven hundred fi fty qualifying contributions for a candidate
running for the office of Member of the Assembly.
(ii) One thousand five hundred qualifying contributions for a
candidate running for the office of Member of the State Senate.
(iii) Two thousand qualifying contributions for a candidate running
for the office of member of the State Board of Equalization.
(iv) Seven thousand five hundred qualifying contributions for a
candidate running for any statewide office other than Governor.
(v) Twenty-five thousand qualifying contributions for a candidate
running for the office of Governor.
(B) No individual legal resident of California shall provide more
than one qualifying contribution for each office in which an election is
held covering the district in which he or she resides.
(C) Each qualifying contribution shall be acknowledged by a
receipt to the contributor, with a copy submitted to the Commission by the
candidate. The receipt shall include the contributor’s signature, printed
name, and home address, the date, and the name of the candidate on whose
behalf the contribution is made. In addition, the receipt shall indicate by
the contributor’s signature that the contributor understands that he or she
may contribute a qualifying contribution to only one candidate for each
office for which the contributor is eligible to vote, that the purpose of the
qualifying contribution is to help the candidate qualify for Clean Money
campaign funding, and that the contribution is made without coercion or
reimbursement.
(D) A contribution submitted as a qualifying contribution that does
not include a signed and fully completed receipt shall not be counted as a
qualifying contribution.
(E) All five-dollar ($5) qualifying contributions, whether in the form
of cash, check, or money order made out to the candidate’s campaign
account, shall be deposited by the candidate in the candidate’s campaign
account.

(PROPOSITION 89 CONTINUED)

(F) All qualifying contributions’ signed receipts shall be sent to the
Commission and shall be accompanied by a check from the candidate’s
campaign account for the total amount of qualifying contribution funds
received for deposit in the Clean Money Fund. This submission shall
be accompanied by a signed statement under penalty of perjury from
the candidate indicating that all of the information on the qualifying
contribution receipts is complete and accurate to the best of the candidate’s
knowledge and that the amount of the enclosed check is equal to the sum
of all the five-dollar ($5) qualifying contributions the candidate has
received.
(G) The candidate discloses at the end of the qualifying period the
total amounts, if any, spent to hire paid circulators to collect qualifying
contributions. The candidate shall disclose the information in a report
filed with the Commission pursuant to regulations the Commission shall
promulgate.
(b) A party candidate for elective state office qualifies as a
participating candidate for the general election campaign period if both of
the following requirements are met:
(1) The candidate met all of the applicable requirements of a
participating candidate in the primary election period and filed a declaration
with the Commission that the candidate has fulfilled and will fulfill all of the
requirements of a participating candidate as stated in this act.
(2) As a participating candidate from an office-qualified party
during the primary election campaign period, the candidate had the highest
number of votes of the candidates contesting the primary election from the
candidate’s respective party and, therefore, won the party’s nomination.
91073. A qualified candidate for elective state office shall collect
at least half the number of signatures as required for an office-qualified
candidate for the same office and may show a greater base of support
by collecting double the amount of signatures as required for an officequalified candidate to become a performance-qualified candidate. The
candidate shall also file a declaration with the Commission that the
candidate has complied and will comply with all of the requirements of
this act. For a candidate who does not run in a primary, the qualifying
period begins any time after January 1 of the election year and lasts 180
days, except that it shall end no later than 90 days before the general
election. A candidate who is not an office-qualified candidate shall notify
the Commission within 24 hours of the day when the candidate has begun
collecting qualifying contributions.
91075. During the first election that occurs after the effective
date of this act, a candidate for elective state office may be certified as a
participating candidate, notwithstanding the acceptance of contributions
or making of expenditures from private funds before the date of enactment
that would, absent this section, disqualify the candidate as a participating
candidate, provided that any private funds accepted but not expended
before the effective date of this act meet any of the following criteria:
(a) Are returned to the contributor.
(b) Are held in a special campaign account and used only for retiring
a debt from a previous campaign.
(c) Are submitted to the Commission for deposit in the Clean Money
Fund.
91077. (a) A participating candidate who accepts any Clean Money
benefits during the primary election campaign period shall comply with all
of the requirements of this chapter applicable to participating candidates
through the general election campaign period whether the candidate
continues to accept benefits or not.
(b) An elected state officer who accepted Clean Money benefits in the
election for the currently held office shall not accept private contributions
from any source and shall not solicit or receive political contributions
for any candidate or any political party committee or other political
committee, until the first day of the Qualifying Period for the next election
for the office currently held. Contributions pursuant to Section 91115 are
not subject to this requirement.
91079. (a) During the primary and general election campaign
periods, a participating candidate who has voluntarily agreed to
participate in, and has become eligible for, Clean Money benefits, shall not
accept private contributions from any source other than the candidate’s
political party as specified in Section 91123. Contributions pursuant to
Section 91115 are not subject to this requirement.
(b) During the qualifying period and the primary and general

text of proposed laws
election campaign periods, a participating candidate who has voluntarily
agreed to participate in, and has become eligible for, Clean Money benefits
shall not solicit or receive political contributions for any other candidate
or for any political party committee or other committee as defined under
Section 82013.
(c) No person shall make a contribution in the name of another
person. A participating candidate who knows or reasonably should have
known that he or she received a qualifying contribution or a seed money
contribution that is not from the person listed on the receipt required by
subparagraph (C) of paragraph (2) of subdivision (a) of Section 91071
shall be liable to pay the Commission the entire amount of the inaccurately
identified contribution for deposit in the Clean Money Fund, in addition
to any penalties.
(d) During the primary and general election campaign periods,
a participating candidate shall pay for all of the candidate’s campaign
expenditures, except petty cash expenditures, by means of a “Clean
Money Debit Card” issued by the Commission, as authorized under
Section 91141.
(e) Candidates for elective state office shall furnish complete
campaign records, including all records of seed money contributions
and qualifying contributions, to the Commission at regular filing
times. Candidates shall cooperate with any audit or examination by the
Commission, the Franchise Tax Board, or any enforcement agency.
91081. (a) During an election for an elective state office, each
participating candidate shall conduct all campaign financial activities
through a single campaign account. Accounts established pursuant to
Section 91115 are not subject to this requirement.
(b) Notwithstanding Section 85201, a participating candidate may
maintain a campaign account other than the campaign account described
in subdivision (a) if the other campaign account is for the purpose of
retiring a campaign debt that was incurred during a previous election
campaign in which the candidate was not a participating candidate.
(c) Contributions for the purposes of retiring a previous campaign
debt that are deposited in the “other campaign account” described in
subdivision (b) shall not be considered “contributions” to the candidate’s
current campaign. Contributions for the purpose of retiring debt shall only
be raised during the six-month period following the date of the election,
unless, for good cause shown, the candidate receives a six-month extension
from the Commission.
(d) Participating candidates shall file reports of financial activity
related to the current election cycle separately from reports of financial
activity related to previous election cycles.
91083. (a) Participating candidates shall use their Clean Money
funds only for direct campaign purposes.
(b) A participating candidate shall not use Clean Money funds for
any of the following:
(1) Costs of legal defense in any campaign law enforcement
proceeding under this act.
(2) Indirect campaign purposes, including, but not limited to, the
following:
(A) The candidate’s personal support or compensation to the
candidate or the candidate’s family.
(B) The candidate’s personal appearance.
(C) Capital assets having a value in excess of five hundred dollars
($500) and useful life extending beyond the end of the current election
period determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles. Notwithstanding this limitation, a participating candidate may
purchase computer-related assets provided that each such asset has a
value not in excess of $1,000.
(D) A contribution or loan to the campaign committee of another
candidate or to a political party committee or other political committee.
(E) An independent expenditure.
(F) A gift in excess of twenty-five dollars ($25) per person.
(G) Any payment or transfer for which compensating value is not
received.
(3) Compensation to any individual who receives a salary from
the State of California. Administrative and support personnel shall be
exempt.
91085. (a) Personal funds contributed by a candidate for elective

Text of Proposed Laws | 175

89

text of proposed laws

89

state office seeking to become eligible as a participating candidate as seed
money to his or her campaign, or by adult members of the candidate’s
family to the candidate, shall not exceed the maximum of one hundred
dollars ($100) per contributor.
(b) Personal funds shall not be used to meet the qualifying
contribution requirement except for one five-dollar ($5) contribution from
the candidate and one five-dollar ($5) contribution from the candidate’s
spouse.
91087. (a) The only private contributions a candidate for elective
state office seeking to become eligible for Clean Money funding shall
accept, other than qualifying contributions, contributions pursuant to
Section 91115, and limited contributions from the candidate’s political
party as specified in Section 91123, are seed money contributions
contributed by individual legal residents of the State of California residing
in the district in which the candidate is running for election prior to the end
of the qualifying period.
(b) A seed money contribution shall not exceed one hundred dollars
($100) per donor, and the aggregate amount of seed money contributions
accepted by a candidate for elective state office seeking to become eligible
for Clean Money funding shall not exceed:
(1) Ten thousand dollars ($10,000) for a candidate running for the
office of Member of the Assembly.
(2) Twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) for a candidate running for
the office of Member of the State Senate.
(3) Thirty thousand dollars ($30,000) for a candidate running for
the office of member of the State Board of Equalization.
(4) Seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000) for a candidate running
for a statewide office other than Governor.
(5) Two hundred fi fty thousand dollars ($250,000) for a candidate
running for the office of Governor.
(c) Receipts for seed money contributions under twenty-five dollars
($25) shall include the contributor’s signature, printed name, street
address, and ZIP Code. Receipts for seed money contributions of twentyfive dollars ($25) or more shall also include the contributor’s occupation
and name of employer. Contributions shall not be retained if the required
disclosure information is not received.
(d) Seed money shall be spent only during the exploratory and
qualifying periods. Seed money shall not be spent during the primary
or general election campaign periods. Any unspent seed money shall be
turned over to the Commission for deposit in the Clean Money Fund.
(e) Within 72 hours after the close of the qualifying period,
candidates seeking to become eligible for Clean Money funding shall do
both of the following:
(1) Fully disclose all seed money contributions and expenditures to
the Commission.
(2) Turn over to the Commission for deposit in the Clean Money
Fund any seed money the candidate has raised during the exploratory
period that exceeds the aggregate seed money limit.
91091. Participating candidates in races for elective state office
with more than one candidate shall agree to participate in at least one
public debate during a contested primary election and two public debates
during a contested general election. The debates shall be conducted
in accordance with regulations issued by the Fair Political Practices
Commission.
91093. (a) No more than five days after a candidate applies for
Clean Money benefits, the Commission shall certify that the candidate is
or is not eligible. Eligibility may be revoked if the candidate violates the
requirements of this act, in which case the candidate shall repay all Clean
Money funds.
(b) The candidate’s request for certification shall be signed by
the candidate and the candidate’s campaign treasurer under penalty of
perjury.
(c) The Commission’s determination is final except that it is subject
to a prompt judicial review.
(d) The Commission shall provide updated information on its Web
site that reflects changes to a candidate’s status as participating or nonparticipating candidates within 24 hours of such a change.
Article 5. Clean Money Benefits

176 | Text of Proposed Laws

91095. (a) Candidates for elective state office who qualify for
Clean Money funding for primary and general elections shall:
(1) Receive Clean Money funding from the Commission for each
election, the amount of which is specified in Section 91099. This funding
may be used to finance any and all campaign expenses during the particular
campaign period for which it was allocated consistent with Section 91081.
(2) Receive, if an office-qualified candidate or a performancequalified candidate showing a broad base of support, additional Clean
Money funding to match any excess expenditure amount spent by a
nonparticipating candidate, as disclosed pursuant to Section 91107,
provided that the dollar value of the excess expenditure amount, combined
with the amount spent by any independent expenditure exceeds, the initial
amount of Clean Money funding received by the participating candidate.
(3) Receive, if an office-qualified candidate or a performancequalified candidate showing a broad base of support, additional Clean
Money funding to match any excess independent expenditure made in
opposition to their candidacies or in support of their opponents’ candidacies,
as disclosed pursuant to Section 91109, provided that the dollar value of
the expenditure, combined with the amount raised or received thus far by
any opposing candidate who benefits from the independent expenditure
exceeds, the initial amount of Clean Money funding received by the
participating candidate.
(b) The maximum aggregate amount of funding a participating
office-qualified candidate or a performance-qualified candidate showing a
broad base of support shall receive to match independent expenditures and
excess expenditures of nonparticipating candidates shall be no more than
five times the amount of Clean Money funding allocated to a participating
candidate pursuant to Section 91099 for a particular primary or general
election campaign period, except that for the office of Governor, the
amount shall be no more than four times the amount of Clean Money
funding allocated to a participating candidate pursuant to Section 91099.
91095.5. (a) Independent expenditures against a participating
candidate shall be treated as expenditures of each opposing candidate for
the purposes of Section 91095.
(b) Independent expenditures in favor of one or more nonparticipating opponents of a participating candidate shall be treated as
expenditures of those non-participating candidates for the purpose of
Section 91095.
(c) Independent expenditures in favor of a participating candidate
shall be treated, for every opposing participating candidate, as though
the independent expenditures were an expenditure of a nonparticipating
opponent, for purpose of Section 91095.
(d) The Commission shall promulgate regulations relating to
independent expenditures that reference or depict more than one candidate
for the purposes of Section 91095.
91097. (a) A qualified or office-qualified candidate for elective state
office shall receive the candidate’s Clean Money funding for the primary
election campaign period on the date on which the Commission certifies
the candidate as a participating candidate. This certification shall take
place no later than five days after the candidate has submitted the required
number of qualifying contribution receipts, a check for the total amount
of qualifying contributions collected, and a declaration stating that the
candidate has complied with all other requirements for eligibility as a
participating candidate, but no earlier than the beginning of the primary
election campaign period.
(b) A qualified or performance-qualified candidate for elective state
office shall receive the candidate’s Clean Money funding for the general
election campaign period within two business days after certification of
the primary election results.
(c) A participating candidate for Legislature running in the primary
of the dominant party in a one-party dominant district may choose to
reallocate a portion of the Clean Money funding amount from the general
election period to the primary period. The candidate shall make this choice
in a writing submitted to the Commission with the materials specified in
subdivision (a) at the close of the qualifying period. The participating
candidate who makes such a choice shall receive an additional amount
equal to 25 percent of the amount specified for the general election for
the appropriate office as set forth in subdivision (b) of Section 91099. The
amount a participating candidate who makes such a choice shall receive at
the beginning of the general election period shall be reduced by 25 percent.

(PROPOSITION 89 CONTINUED)

The choice may also affect the amount at which an opposing candidate
may be considered to have exceeded the amount of Clean Money funding
available to the participating candidate. If a competing participating
candidate transfers funds pursuant to this subdivision from the general
to the primary election by the close of the qualifying period, any other
participating candidates in the same election may transfer the same
amount of funds from the general to the primary election by notifying the
Commission in writing within five days of the close of the qualifying period.
The Commission shall promulgate regulations that require notification of
such transfers to the Commission and to affected candidates.
91099. (a) For candidates in a primary election for elective state
office or for performance-qualified candidates for elective state office in a
special or special runoff election:
(1) The amount of Clean Money funding for an office-qualified party
candidate in a primary, special, or special runoff election is:
(A) Two hundred fi fty thousand dollars ($250,000) for a candidate
running for the office of Member of the Assembly.
(B) Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) for a candidate
running for the office of Member of the State Senate.
(C) Two hundred fi fty thousand dollars ($250,000) for a candidate
running for the office of member of the State Board of Equalization.
(D) Two million dollars ($2,000,000) for a candidate running for a
statewide office other than Governor.
(E) Ten million dollars ($10,000,000) for a candidate running for
Governor.
(2) The amount of Clean Money funding for a performance-qualified
candidate in a primary or special election is 20 percent of the amount an
office-qualified party candidate running for the same office could receive.
The amount of Clean Money funding for a performance-qualified candidate
in a special runoff election is 50 percent of the amount an office-qualified
candidate running for the same office would receive.
(3) The Clean Money funding amount for a participating candidate
in a primary election where no other candidates are running in the same
party primary for that seat is 10 percent of the amount provided in a
contested primary election.
(b) For candidates for elective state office in a general election:
(1) The amount of Clean Money funding for an office-qualified
candidate in a contested general election is:
(A) Four hundred thousand dollars ($400,000) for a candidate
running for the office of Member of the Assembly.
(B) Eight hundred thousand dollars ($800,000) for a candidate
running for the office of Member of the State Senate.
(C) Four hundred thousand dollars ($400,000) for a candidate
running for the office of member of the State Board of Equalization.
(D) Two million dollars ($2,000,000) for a candidate running for a
statewide office other than Governor.
(E) Fifteen million dollars ($15,000,000) for a candidate running
for Governor.
(2) The amount of Clean Money funding for a performance-qualified
candidate in a contested general election is 50 percent of the amount an
office-qualified candidate running for the same office could receive.
(3) The amount of Clean Money funding for a qualified candidate in
a contested general election is 25 percent of the amount an office-qualified
candidate running for the same office could receive.
Article 6. Restrictions on Nonparticipating Candidates, Political
Parties, and Independent Expenditure Committees
91101. (a) A person, other than a small contributor committee or
political party committee, shall not make to any nonparticipating candidate
or candidates, and a nonparticipating candidate shall not accept from
a person other than a small contributor committee or a political party
committee, any contribution totaling more than five hundred dollars
($500) per election, if a candidate for the Legislature or for the State
Board of Equalization, or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) if a
candidate for statewide office. Contributions pursuant to Section 91115 are
not subject to this requirement.
(b) The provisions of this section do not apply to a nonparticipating
candidate’s contributions of personal funds to the candidate’s own

text of proposed laws
campaign.
91103. A small contributor committee shall not make to any
nonparticipating candidate, and a nonparticipating candidate shall not
accept from a small contributor committee, any contribution totaling more
than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) per election.
91105. (a) A person shall not make to any independent expenditure
committee, and a committee shall not accept from a person, contributions
totaling more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) per calendar year for
the purpose of making expenditures in support of the election or defeat of
a candidate, or candidates for elective state office.
(b) A person may not make to any committee, other than a political
party committee, and a committee other than a political party committee
may not accept, any contribution totaling more than one thousand dollars
($1,000) per calendar year for the purpose of making contributions to any
committees, including ballot measure committees, controlled by candidates
for elective state office.
(c) A person may not make to any political party committee, and
a political party committee may not accept, any contribution totaling
more than seven thousand five-hundred dollars ($7,500) per calendar
year for the purpose of making contributions for the support or defeat of
candidates for elective state or for the purpose of making contributions
to any committees, including ballot measure committees, controlled by
candidates for elective state office. Notwithstanding Section 85312, this
limit applies to contributions made to a political party used for the purpose
of making expenditures at the behest of a candidate for elective state office
for communications to party members related to the candidate’s candidacy
for elective state office.
(d) Nothing in this chapter limits a nonparticipating candidate
for elective state office from transferring contributions received by the
candidate in excess of any amount necessary to defray the candidate’s
expenses for election related activities or holding office to a political party
committee, provided those transferred contributions are used for purposes
consistent with paragraph (4) of subdivision (b) of Section 89519.
(e) An elected state officer, nonparticipating candidate, legal defense
account, political party committee, or independent expenditure committee
shall not solicit or accept a contribution from a registered state lobbyist
or lobbying firm, or from a state contractor, if the lobbyist or employee
or principal of the lobbying firm is registered to lobby, or if the state
contractor has present or potential future business with, the governmental
agency for which the candidate is seeking election or the governmental
agency of the elected state officer.
(f) No committee controlled by a candidate or officeholder, shall
make any contribution to any other candidate running for state office or
his or her controlled committee.
(g) No person shall contribute in the aggregate more than seven
thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500) to all candidates for elective state
offices and their controlled committees, political party committees, and
any other committees, in any calendar year, for the purpose of making
contributions to candidates for elective state office or independent
expenditures to support or oppose candidates for elective state office;
provided, however, that a person may contribute up to an additional seven
thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500) in a calendar year to independent
expenditure committees that support or oppose candidates for elective
state office.
(h) A controlled committee of a candidate shall not make independent
expenditures and shall not make contributions to another committee which
makes independent expenditures to support or oppose other candidates.
Article 6.5.

Applicability of Limits to Special Elections and
Special Runoff Elections

91106. The contribution and expenditure limits and restrictions of
this chapter apply to special elections and apply to special runoff elections.
A special election and a special runoff election are separate elections for
purposes of the contribution and expenditure provisions set forth in this
chapter.
Article 7.

Disclosure Requirements

91107. (a) A nonparticipating candidate shall notify the Commission
online or electronically on the same day that the candidate spends or

Text of Proposed Laws | 177

89

text of proposed laws

89

incurs expenditures in excess of the initial amount of Clean Money
funding allocated to the candidate’s Clean Money opponent or opponents
pursuant to Section 91099. The notification shall include the excess
amount spent or incurred as of that date. Upon receiving notification from
a nonparticipating candidate, the Commission shall immediately notify all
other candidates in that election.
(b) A nonparticipating candidate that spends or incurs expenditures
in excess of the initial amount of Clean Money funding actually received
by the candidate’s Clean Money opponent or opponents, shall notify
the Commission online or electronically within 24 hours each time the
candidate’s committee makes or incurs cumulative expenditures of five
thousand dollars ($5,000) or more in excess of the amount(s).
(c) In the event a nonparticipating candidate fails to timely notify the
Commission in accordance with subdivisions (a) and (b), the Commission
may make its own determination as to whether excess expenditures have
been made or incurred by nonparticipating candidates.
(d) Upon receiving an excess expenditure notification or determining
that an excess expenditure has been made, the Commission shall
release additional Clean Money funding to the opposing participating
performance-qualified and office-qualified candidates within one business
day. The amount released shall be equal to the excess amount spent or
incurred by the nonparticipating candidate subject to the limits set forth in
subdivision (b) of Section 91095.
91107.5. (a) No candidate for elective state office shall expend or
contribute more than $25,000 in personal funds in connection with his or
her campaign so as to make the total amount contributed from all sources
aggregate more than the amount set forth in Section 91099 for the office
for which they are running unless and until the conditions in subdivisions
(b) and (c) are met.
(b) Notice of the candidate’s intent to so expend or contribute shall
be provided online, electronically, by facsimile, or personal delivery, to
all opponents and to the Commission within 15 days of the decision to
expend or contribute, specifying the amount intended to be expended or
contributed.
(c) All personal funds to be expended or contributed by the candidate
pursuant to subdivision (a) shall first be deposited in the candidate’s
campaign contribution checking account at least 15 days before the
election. Such deposited funds shall be considered an expenditure
made by the candidate and shall trigger matching funds pursuant to
Section 91095.
(d) In the event that the candidate contributes or expends more in
personal funds than provided by this section, the matching fund limit set
forth in subdivision (b) of Section 91095 shall be doubled for all opposing
participating candidates.
91109. (a) In addition to any other report required by this
chapter, a committee, including a political party committee, that makes
independent expenditures of one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more during
an election cycle to support or oppose a candidate, shall file a report with
the Commission disclosing the independent expenditure within 24 hours of
the time the independent expenditure is made or incurred. This report shall
disclose the same information required by subdivision (b) of Section 84204
and shall be filed online or electronically if the committee is required to file
reports pursuant to Section 84605, and by facsimile, personal delivery or
by such other means as determined by the Commission for committees that
do not file reports electronically.
(b) An expenditure may not be considered independent, and shall be
treated as a contribution from the person making the expenditure to the
candidate on whose behalf, or for whose benefit, the expenditure is made,
if the expenditure is made under any of the following circumstances:
(1) The expenditure is made with the cooperation of, or in consultation
with, the candidate on whose behalf, or for whose benefit, the expenditure
is made, or any controlled committee or any agent of the candidate.
(2) The expenditure is made in concert with, or at the request or
suggestion of, the candidate on whose behalf, or for whose benefit, the
expenditure is made, or any controlled committee or any agent of the
candidate.
(3) The expenditure is made under any arrangement, coordination,
or direction with respect to the candidate or the candidate’s agent and the
person making the expenditure.
(c) The report to the Commission shall include a signed statement

178 | Text of Proposed Laws

under penalty of perjury by the person or persons making the independent
expenditure identifying the candidate or candidates supported or opposed
by the independent expenditure, and affirming that the expenditure is
independent and not coordinated with a candidate or a political party.
(d) Any committee that fails to file the required report to the
Commission or that knowingly provides materially false information in a
report filed pursuant to subdivisions (a) or (b), may be fined up to three
times the amount of the independent expenditure, in addition to any other
remedies provided by this act.
(e) Upon receiving a report that an independent expenditure has been
made or incurred, the Commission shall immediately notify all candidates
in that election and release additional Clean Money funding, pursuant to
Section 91095, within one business day to all participating candidates in
that specific primary or general election whom the Commission determines
were not beneficiaries of the independent expenditure, subject to the limits
in subdivision (b) of Section 91095.
91113. (a) In addition to other disclosure provisions contained in
this Code, all broadcast and print advertisements paid for by a candidate
for elective state office or committee controlled by a candidate for elective
state office shall include a disclosure statement indicating that the
candidate has approved of the contents of the advertisement.
(b) The disclosure statement required by subdivision (a) that is
included in a broadcast advertisement shall be spoken so as to be clearly
audible and understood by the intended public and otherwise appropriately
conveyed for the hearing impaired.
(c) The disclosure statement required by subdivision (a) that is
included in a print advertisement shall be printed clearly and legibly in
no less than 10-point type and in a conspicuous manner as defined by the
Commission.
(d) For purposes of this section, “advertisement” means any general
or public advertisement which is authorized and paid for by a candidate
or committee controlled by a candidate for the purpose of supporting
or opposing a candidate for elective state office, but does not include a
campaign button smaller than 10 inches in diameter, a bumper sticker
smaller than 60 square inches, or other advertisement as determined by
regulations of the Commission.
Article 8. Ballot Access, Recount, Legal Defense,
Officeholder, and Inaugural Funds
91115. (a) A candidate for elective state office or elected state
officer may establish a separate account to defray attorney’s fees and
other related legal costs incurred for the candidate’s or elected state
officer’s expenses in any litigation over ballot access, qualifications or
designations, election recounts and contests, or in connection with any
legal defense if the candidate or elected state officer is subject to one or
more civil or criminal proceedings or administrative proceedings arising
directly out of the conduct of an election campaign, the electoral process,
or the performance of the officer’s governmental activities and duties.
These funds may be used only to defray those attorney’s fees and other
related legal costs.
(b) An elected state officer who accepted Clean Money benefits in the
election shall receive $50,000 annually from the Clean Money Fund, if a
member of the Legislature, or $100,000 annually for all statewide offices to
defray officeholder expenses. Any such elected state officer shall not accept
private contributions from any source for his or her officeholder account
for the currently held office unless such officer raises private contributions
for a campaign account in excess of the amounts set forth in Sec. 91087.
In the event that such elected officer raises private contributions for a
campaign account in excess of the amounts set forth in Sec. 91087, he or
she shall no longer receive money for an officeholder account as of the
start of the next calendar year and may raise private contributions for an
officeholder account pursuant to subdivision (c) of Section 91115.
(c) An elected state officer who did not accept Clean Money benefits
in the election for his or her current office may establish a separate account
to defray officeholder expenses that are set forth by the Commission. No
funds from this account shall be used for a mass mailing. The aggregate
amount contributed to any officeholder account shall not exceed fi fty
thousand dollars ($50,000) annually for any legislative officer or one
hundred thousand ($100,000) for any statewide officer.
(d) A Governor, Lieutenant Governor, or other statewide officer may

(PROPOSITION 89 CONTINUED)

establish an inaugural account to cover the cost of events, celebrations,
gatherings, and communications that take place as part of, or in honor
of, the officer’s inauguration. No inaugural account may exceed $500,000
cumulatively.
(e) A candidate or officer may receive contributions of up to five
hundred dollars ($500) per person per year in the aggregate for accounts
in subdivisions (a), (c), and (d). All contributions, whether cash or in-kind,
shall be reported in a manner prescribed by the Commission. Contributions
to such funds shall not be considered campaign contributions.
(f) A candidate or elected state officer who has established a legal
account pursuant to subdivision (a) shall dispose of all leftover funds once
the legal dispute is resolved and all expenses are discharged. The candidate
or elected state officer shall dispose of the excess funds consistent with for
one or more of the purposes set forth in paragraphs (1) to (5), inclusive, of
subdivision (b) of Section 89519.
(g) An elected state officer who has established an officeholder
account pursuant to subdivision (b) shall return to the state Clean Money
Fund all leftover funds once the officer leaves and all expenses are
discharged.
(h) An elected state officer who has established an officeholder
account pursuant to subdivision (c) shall dispose of all leftover funds once
the officer leaves office and all expenses are discharged. The elected state
officer shall dispose of the excess funds consistent with for one or more of
the purposes set forth in paragraphs (1) to (5), inclusive, of subdivision (b)
of Section 89519.
Article 9.

Restrictions on Candidates

91117. A candidate for elective state office or any committee
controlled by the candidate shall not receive any contributions prior to the
beginning of the exploratory period.
91119. A nonparticipating candidate may transfer campaign funds
from one controlled committee to a controlled committee for elective state
office of the same nonparticipating candidate. Contributions transferred
shall be attributed to specific contributors using a “last in, first out” or
“first in, first out” accounting method, and these attributed contributions
when aggregated with all other contributions from the same contributor
shall not exceed the limits set forth in Section 91101, 91103 or 91105.
91121. A nonparticipating candidate may accept a contribution
after the date of the election only to the extent that the contribution does not
exceed net debts outstanding from the election and the contribution does
not otherwise exceed the applicable contribution limit for that election. All
debts shall be repaid or written off no later than 90 days after the general
election. The Commission may extend this deadline for up to an additional
90 days upon a finding of good cause for the extension based on facts and
circumstances presented by the candidate.
91123. Candidates for elective state office may accept monetary or
in-kind contributions from political parties provided that the aggregate
amount of such contributions from all political party committees combined
does not exceed the following amounts:
(a) The aggregate amount of monetary or in kind contributions from
all political party committees combined for each participating and nonparticipating candidate in a primary, special, or special runoff election is:
(1) Twelve thousand five hundred dollars ($12,500) for a candidate
running for the office of Member of the Assembly.
(2) Twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) for a candidate running
for the office of Member of the State Senate.
(3) Twelve thousand five hundred dollars ($12,500) for a candidate
running for the office of member of the State Board of Equalization.
(4) One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) for a candidate
running for a statewide office other than Governor.
(5) Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) for a candidate
running for Governor.
(b) The aggregate amount of monetary or in kind contributions from
all political party committees combined for each participating and nonparticipating candidate in a contested general election is:
(1) Twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) for a candidate running for
the office of Member of the Assembly.
(2) Forty thousand dollars ($40,000) for a candidate running for the
office of Member of the State Senate.

text of proposed laws
(3) Twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) for a candidate running for
the office of member of the State Board of Equalization.
(4) Two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000) for a candidate
running for a statewide office other than Governor.
(5) Seven hundred fi fty thousand dollars ($750,000) for a candidate
running for Governor.
Such contributions shall not count against the Clean Money funding
amounts available to participating candidates and funds may be spent directly
by participating candidates without using a Clean Money Debit Card.
Article 10.

Voter Pamphlet Statements

91127. The Secretary of State shall designate in the state ballot
pamphlet those candidates who have voluntarily agreed to be participating
candidates.
91131. (a) A candidate who is a participating candidate may place
a statement in the state ballot pamphlet and on any Internet Web site listing
of candidates maintained by any government agency including, but not
limited to, the Secretary of State, that does not exceed 250 words. The
statement shall not make any reference to any opponent of the candidate.
The candidate may also provide a list of ten endorsers for placement in the
ballot pamphlet. This statement and list of endorsers shall be submitted in
accordance with timeframes and procedures set forth by the Secretary of
State for the preparation of the state ballot pamphlets.
(b) A nonparticipating candidate may pay to place a statement in
the appropriate ballot pamphlet or voter information portion of the sample
ballot that does not exceed 250 words, and may pay the price to place a
list of up to 10 endorsers in the ballot pamphlet. The statement shall not
make any reference to any opponent of the candidate. The statement shall
be submitted in accordance with timeframes and procedures set forth by
the Secretary of State for the preparation of the state ballot pamphlets. The
nonparticipating candidate shall be charged the pro rata cost of printing,
handling, translating, and mailing any campaign statement and list of
endorsers provided pursuant to this subdivision.
Article 10.5.

Voter Education and Outreach

91132. The Secretary of State shall, using the funds provided by
paragraph (3) of subdivision (a) of Section 91134, conduct voter education
and outreach efforts throughout the state regarding the public campaign
funding system established by this chapter and, specifically, the meaning
behind the statements included in the ballot, as provided in subparagraph
(A) of paragraph (2) of subdivision (a) of Section 13207 of the Elections
Code. Such efforts shall include public service announcements in radio,
television, or print media that are disseminated in a manner consistent
with the language assistance requirements of the Voting Rights Act, 42
U.S.C. Sec. 1973aa-1. Public announcements disseminated by television,
radio, or print media shall not feature the voice, name, still or video image
of the Secretary of State.
Article 11.

Appropriations for the Clean Money Fund

91133. A special, dedicated, nonlapsing Clean Money Fund is
created in the State Treasury. The Franchise Tax Board shall deposit into
the Clean Money Fund fees generated from the following assessments:
(a) an increase of 0.2 in the rate for amounts paid on taxable income
as provided in subdivision (g) of Section 23151 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code [from 8.84 percent to 9.04 percent];
(b) an increase of 0.2 in the rate for amounts paid on taxable income
as provided in subdivision (b) of Section 23186 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code [from 10.84 percent to 11.04 percent]; and
(c) an increase in the tax imposed on passive investment income
under Section 23811 of the Revenue and Taxation Code from 1.5 percent
to 1.66 percent of annual net passive investment income for corporations
with over $50 million in total receipts.
91134. (a) The Franchise Tax Board shall administer the collection
of the Clean Money Fees described herein, including any penalties and
interest. The Clean Money Fund is established for the following purposes:
(1) Providing public financing for the election campaigns of certified
participating candidates during primary and general campaign periods.

Text of Proposed Laws | 179

89

text of proposed laws
(2) Paying for the administrative and enforcement costs of the
Commission related to this chapter. The Commission shall annually be
appropriated at least three million dollars ($3,000,000), adjusted for costof-living changes as provided in Section 82001, to administer this act.
(3) Paying for the voter education and outreach efforts as provided
in Section 91132, except that the annual amount of funds available for
these efforts shall be no more than five percent of the amount specified in
subdivision (a) for the each of the first two years after implementation of
this chapter in which there are elections, and no more than one percent
every year thereafter in which there are elections. Funds unused by the
Secretary of State shall revert to the Clean Money Fund, annually.
(b) Funds collected pursuant to this section shall first be collected in
the 2007–08 fiscal year and in each subsequent fiscal year.
91135. Other sources of revenue to be deposited in the Clean Money
Fund shall include all of the following:
(a) The qualifying contributions required of candidates seeking
to become certified as participating candidates and candidates’ excess
qualifying contributions.
(b) The excess seed money contributions of candidates seeking to
become certified as participating candidates.
(c) Unspent or uncommitted funds shall be returned no later than
thirty days following the date of the close of the primary election period or
the general election for which they were distributed. The Commission shall
promulgate regulations in furtherance of this subdivision.
(d) Fines levied by the Commission against candidates for violation
of election laws.
(e) Voluntary donations made directly to the Clean Money Fund.
(f) Any interest generated by the Clean Money Fund.
91136. The amount of money in the Clean Money Fund shall not
exceed four times the amount of six dollars ($6.00) times the number
of California residents. Any funds that, if deposited in the Clean Money
Fund, would cause the balance in the fund to exceed this amount shall be
irrevocably transferred to the General Fund.
Article 12. Limits on Contributions to
Candidate-Controlled Ballot Measures

89

91137. Limits on Contributions to Candidate-Controlled Ballot
Measure Committees
(a) A ballot measure committee not controlled by a candidate
for elective state office or an elected state officer is not subject to the
provisions of this section. A ballot measure committee becomes subject to
the provisions of this section once it becomes controlled by one or more
candidates for elective state office, as defined in Section 82016. However,
a ballot measure committee controlled by an individual who ceases to be
a candidate as defined in Government Code Section 82007 is no longer
subject to the provisions of this section.
(b) No person shall make a contribution or contributions totaling
in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000) to any committee that is
established for the purpose of supporting or opposing a state or local ballot
measure and that is controlled by a candidate for elective state office or
an elected state officer. This contribution limit shall apply as an aggregate
limit upon all contributions made by any person to all ballot measure
committees controlled by the same candidate for elective state office or
the same elected state officer, even if those committees are established
for the purpose of supporting or opposing different state or local ballot
measures, and even if one or more of those ballot measure committees are
controlled by more than one candidate for elective state office or elected
state officers.
(c) A ballot measure committee that is primarily formed to support
or oppose a ballot measure or measures and that is controlled by a
candidate for elective state office or an elected state officer is subject to the
post-election fundraising limitations of Section 85316. A general purpose
ballot measure committee is not subject to the post-election fundraising
limitations of Government Code Section 85316.
Article 13. Limits on Contributions or Independent Expenditures by
Corporations in Connection with State Candidate Elections
91138.

Limits on Contributions or Independent Expenditures by

180 | Text of Proposed Laws

Corporations in Connection with State Candidate Elections
(a) Except as provided in subdivision (c) of this section, and except
for direct contributions pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 91101, it is
unlawful for any national or state bank or for any corporation incorporated
under the laws of this or any other state or any foreign country, to make
a contribution or expenditure in connection with the election of any
candidate for elective state office. It shall likewise be unlawful for any
candidate, committee, or other person knowingly to accept or to receive
any contribution prohibited by this section, or for any officer or any
director of any corporation or of any national or state bank to consent to
any contribution or expenditure by the corporation or national or state
bank, as the case may be, prohibited by this section.
(b) For purposes of this section, the term “contribution or
expenditure” includes a contribution, expenditure or independent
expenditure, as those terms are defined in Sections 82015, 82025 and
82031, and also includes any direct or indirect payment, distribution, loan,
advance, deposit, or gift of money, or any services, or anything of value
provided to any candidate or committee (including any political party
committee) in connection with any election for elective state office, except
that nothing in this section shall prohibit (1) a loan of money by a national
or state bank made in accordance with the applicable banking laws and
regulations and in the ordinary course of business; or (2) the payment or
receipt of interest earnings, stock or other dividends on investments where
the interest or dividends are received in accordance with the applicable
banking laws and in the ordinary course of business.
(c) For purposes of this section, the term “contribution or
expenditure” shall not include
(1) communications by a bank or corporation to its stockholders and
executive or administrative personnel and their immediate families on any
subject;
(2) nonpartisan registration and get-out-the-vote campaigns
by a bank or corporation aimed at its stockholders and executive or
administrative personnel and their immediate families; and
(3) the establishment, administration, and solicitation by a bank or
corporation of contributions to a separate segregated fund to be utilized
for making political contributions or expenditures, provided that the fund
may consist only of voluntary contributions solicited from individuals who
are either stockholders, members or employees of the bank or corporation,
and their immediate families.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any separate segregated fund established
in accordance with paragraph (3) of subdivision (c) to make a contribution
or expenditure by utilizing money or anything of value secured by physical
force, job discrimination, financial reprisals, or the threat of force, job
discrimination, or financial reprisal; or by dues, fees, or other funds required
as a condition of employment; or by funds obtained in any commercial
transaction. It shall be unlawful for any person soliciting an employee
for a contribution to any separate segregated fund (1) to fail to inform the
employee of the political purposes of the fund at the time of the solicitation;
and (2) to fail to inform the employee, at the time of the solicitation, of his or
her right to refuse to so contribute without any reprisal.
(e) This section shall not prevent a trade association or a separate
segregated fund established by a trade association from soliciting
contributions from the stockholders and executive or administrative
personnel of the member corporations of the trade association and the
immediate families of the stockholders or personnel to the extent that
the solicitation of the stockholders and personnel, and their immediate
families, has been separately and specifically approved by the member
corporation involved, and the member corporation does not approve any
such solicitation by more than one such trade association in any calendar
year.
(f) For purposes of this section, the term “executive or administrative
personnel” means individuals employed by a corporation who are paid on a
salary, rather than hourly, basis and who have policymaking, managerial,
professional, or supervisory responsibilities.
(g) The Commission shall promulgate regulations implementing
the requirements of this section and governing the administration and
solicitation of contributions to separate segregated funds established
in accordance with paragraph (3) of subdivision (c). The Commission’s
regulations shall conform to the intent of the voters in adopting this
section and shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be consistent with
the regulations adopted by the Federal Election Commission interpreting

(PROPOSITION 89 CONTINUED)

and implementing the comparable provisions of the Federal Election
Campaign Act.
Article 14. Limits on Contributions or Expenditures by Corporations
in Connection with State Ballot Measure Elections
91139. Limits on Contributions or Expenditures by Corporations in
Connection with State Ballot Measure Elections
(a) Except as provided in subdivision (c), it is unlawful for any
national or state bank or for any corporation incorporated under the laws
of this or any other state or any foreign country, to make contributions
or expenditures to support or oppose the qualification, passage or defeat
of a state ballot measure that in the aggregate exceed $10,000 for or
against any statewide ballot measure. It shall likewise be unlawful for any
candidate, committee, or other person knowingly to accept or to receive
any contribution prohibited in excess of the limits established by this
section, or for any officer or any director of any corporation or of any
national or state bank to consent to any contribution or expenditure by
the corporation or national or state bank, as the case may be, prohibited
by this section.
(b) For purposes of this section, the term “contribution or
expenditure” includes a contribution, expenditure or independent
expenditure, as those terms are defined in Sections 82015, 82025 and
82031, and also includes any direct or indirect payment, distribution, loan,
advance, deposit, or gift of money, or any services, or anything of value
provided to any candidate or committee, including any political party
committee, to support or oppose the qualification, passage or defeat of a
state ballot measure, except that nothing in this section shall prohibit (1)
a loan of money by a national or state bank made in accordance with the
applicable banking laws and regulations and in the ordinary course of
business, or (2) the payment or receipt of interest earnings, stock or other
dividends on investments where the interest or dividends are received in
accordance with the applicable banking laws and in the ordinary course
of business.
(c) For purposes of this section, the term “contribution or
expenditure” shall not include (1) communications by a bank or corporation
to its stockholders and executive or administrative personnel and their
immediate families on any subject, (2) nonpartisan registration and getout-the-vote campaigns by a bank or corporation aimed at its stockholders
and executive or administrative personnel and their immediate families,
or (3) the establishment, administration, and solicitation by a bank or
corporation of contributions to a separate segregated fund to be utilized
for making political contributions or expenditures, provided that the fund
shall consist only of voluntary contributions solicited from individuals who
are either stockholders, members or employees of the bank or corporation,
and their immediate families.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any separate segregated fund established
in accordance with paragraph (3) of subdivision (c) to make a contribution
or expenditure by utilizing money or anything of value secured by physical
force, job discrimination, financial reprisals, or the threat of force, job
discrimination, or financial reprisal; or by dues, fees, or other funds
required as a condition of employment; or by funds obtained in any
commercial transaction. It shall be unlawful for any person soliciting an
employee for a contribution to any separate segregated fund (1) to fail
to inform the employee of the political purposes of the fund at the time
of the solicitation; and (2) to fail to inform the employee, at the time of
the solicitation, of his or her right to refuse to so contribute without any
reprisal.
(e) This section shall not prevent a trade association or a separate
segregated fund established by a trade association from soliciting
contributions from the stockholders and executive or administrative
personnel of the member corporations of the trade association and the
immediate families of the stockholders or personnel to the extent that the
solicitation of the stockholders and personnel, and their immediate families,
has been separately and specifically approved by the member corporation
involved, and the member corporation does not approve any such solicitation
by more than one such trade association in any calendar year.
(f) For purposes of this section, the term “executive or administrative
personnel” means individuals employed by a corporation who are paid on a
salary, rather than hourly, basis and who have policymaking, managerial,
professional, or supervisory responsibilities.
(g) The Commission shall promulgate regulations implementing

text of proposed laws
the requirements of this section and governing the administration and
solicitation of contributions to separate segregated funds established
in accordance with paragraph (3) of subdivision (c). The Commission’s
regulations shall conform to the intent of the voters in adopting this
section and shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be consistent with
the regulations adopted by the Federal Election Commission interpreting
and implementing the comparable provisions of the Federal Election
Campaign Act.
Article 15.

Nonprofit Corporation Exemption

91140. Nonprofit Corporations Exempt from Prohibitions and
Limits on Political Contributions or Expenditures
(a) The prohibitions and limits on contributions or expenditures set
forth in Sections 91138 and 91139 shall not apply to a qualified nonprofit
corporation that has all of the following characteristics:
(1) It does not qualify as or engage in any of the activities of a
business entity, as defined in Section 82005;
(2) It has:
(A) No shareholders or other persons, other than employees and
creditors with no ownership interest, affiliated in any way that could allow
them to make a claim on the organization’s assets or earnings; and
(B) No persons who are offered or who receive any benefit that is a
disincentive for them to disassociate themselves with the corporation on
the basis of the corporation’s position on a political issue.
(3) It:
(A) Was not established by a business entity;
(B) Is not “affiliated” with a business entity within the meaning of
Section 150 of the Corporations Code;
(C) Is not composed of members that are business entities or that
engage in the activities of a business entity;
(D) Does not directly or indirectly accept donations of anything of
value from business entities; and
(4) If unable, for good cause, to demonstrate through accounting
records that subparagraph (D) of paragraph (3) is satisfied, has a written
policy against accepting donations from business entities; and
(5) It is described in 26 U.S.C. §501(a) and (c).
(b) Whenever a qualified nonprofit corporation solicits donations,
the solicitation shall inform potential donors that their donations may be
used for political purposes.
(c) Qualified nonprofit corporations possessing all of the
characteristics enumerated in subdivision (a) remain subject to all other
applicable requirements and limitations of this title, including those
provisions requiring disclosure of any contributions or expenditures
permitted by this section.
Article 16. Administration
91141. (a) Upon a determination that a candidate has met all the
requirements for becoming a participating candidate as provided for in
this act, the Commission shall issue to the candidate a card, known as the
“Clean Money Debit Card,” and a “line of debit” entitling the candidates
and members of the candidate’s staff to draw Clean Money funds from a
Commission account to pay for all campaign costs and expenses up to the
amount of Clean Money funding the candidate has received.
(b) Neither a participating candidate nor any other person on behalf
of a participating candidate shall pay campaign costs by cash, check,
money order, loan, or by any other financial means other than the Clean
Money Debit Card, except for contributions received from political party
committees in accordance with Section 91123.
(c) Cash amounts of one hundred dollars ($100) or less per day may
be drawn on the Clean Money Debit Card and used to pay expenses of no
more than twenty-five dollars ($25) each. Records of all such expenditures
shall be maintained and reported to the Commission.
91142. If the Commission determines that there are insufficient
funds in the program to fund adequately all candidates eligible for Clean
Money funds, the Commission shall reduce the grants proportionately to
all eligible candidates. If the Commission notifies a candidate that the
Clean Money funds will be reduced and the candidate has not received any
Clean Money funds, the candidate may decide to be a nonparticipating

Text of Proposed Laws | 181

89

text of proposed laws
candidate. If a candidate has already received Clean Money funds or
wishes to start receiving such funds, a candidate who wishes to collect
contributions may do so in amounts up to the contribution limits provided
for nonparticipating candidates but shall not collect more than the total
of Clean Money funds that the candidate was entitled to receive had there
been sufficient funds in the program less the amount of Clean Money funds
that will be or have been provided. If, at a later point, the Commission
determines that adequate funds have become available, candidates, who
have not raised private funds, shall receive the funds owed to them.
91143. (a) At the end of the primary election period, a participating
candidate who has received funds pursuant to Article 5 shall return to
the fund all funds in the candidate’s campaign account above an amount
sufficient to pay any unpaid bills for expenditures made during the
primary election period and for goods or services directed to the primary
election.
(b) At the end of the general election period, a participating
candidate shall return to the fund all funds in the candidate’s campaign
account above an amount sufficient to pay any unpaid bills for expenditures
made before the general election and for goods or services directed to the
general election.
(c) A participating candidate shall pay all uncontested and unpaid
bills referenced in this section no later than thirty days after the primary
or general election. A participating candidate shall make monthly reports
to the commission concerning the status of the dispute over any contested
bills. Any funds in a candidate’s campaign account after payment of bills
shall be returned promptly to the fund.
(d) If a participating candidate is replaced, and the replacement
candidate files an oath with the Secretary of State certifying that he or
she shall assume all responsibility for compliance with the provisions of
this chapter concerning the current status and ongoing administration of
the campaign account, and further certifying that he or she will faithfully
comply will all provisions of this chapter applicable the participating
candidate status he or she is assuming as a replacement candidate, the
campaign account of the participating candidate shall be transferred to the
replacement candidate and the commission shall certify the replacement
candidate as a participating candidate with the same status, rights and
obligations as the replaced candidate. If the replacement candidate does
not file such an oath, the campaign account shall be liquidated and all
remaining funds returned to the fund.
Article 17.

89

Cost of Living

91144. The Commission shall adjust the contribution limitations,
spending limits, seed money provisions, funding amounts provided and
the Clean Money Fund provisions in January of every odd-numbered
year to reflect any increase or decrease in the Consumer Price Index and
the increase in registered voters. Those adjustments shall be rounded to
the nearest ten dollars ($10) for the seed money provisions, one hundred
dollars ($100) for the limitations on contributions, and one thousand
dollars ($1,000) for the Clean Money provisions.
91145. On or before December 6 of each year ending in one, the
Commission shall prepare and provide to each Member of the Legislature
and to the standing committees in the Assembly and the Senate with
jurisdiction over elections a report containing a review and analysis
of the functioning of the Clean Money Fund and the Commission’s
recommendations as to whether additional cost of living adjustments,
beyond those specified in Section 91144 should be made to the spending
limits, seed money provisions, funding amounts provided and the Clean
Money Fund provisions of this chapter, and suggesting other changes
that are advisable to further the purpose of this act. The Commission’s
recommendations shall be based upon an analysis of the disclosures of
campaign contributions and expenditures made by non-participating
candidates in the preceding decade and other campaign financing
information available, and this analysis shall be set forth in detail in
the report. Amendments to this chapter made in accordance with the
Commission’s recommendation may be adopted by a vote of 55 percent of
both houses of the Legislature.
Article 18.
91146.

Enforcement

(a) It is unlawful for participating candidates or their

182 | Text of Proposed Laws

agents to knowingly accept more Clean Money benefits than those to which
they are entitled, spend more than the amount of Clean Money funding they
have received, or misuse such benefits or Clean Money funding.
(b) Any person, including an individual specified in Section 91115,
who knowingly or willfully violates any provision of this chapter is guilty
of a misdemeanor. Any person who knowingly or willfully causes any other
person to violate any provision of this chapter, or who aids and abets any
other person in the violation of any provision of this chapter, shall be liable
under the provisions of this article.
(c) Prosecution of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall
be commenced within four years after the date of the violation.
91147. (a) No person convicted of a misdemeanor under this
chapter shall act as a lobbyist, state contractor, run for elective office, or
be eligible for appointed office or commission appointment for a period
of five years following the date of the conviction unless the court at the
time of sentencing specifically determines that this provision shall not be
applicable. Non-candidate persons convicted for violations of this chapter
shall be prohibited from receiving compensation for any electioneering
activities or from firms that receive compensation for election activities
for a period of five years following the date of conviction unless the court
at the time of sentencing specifically determines that this provision shall
not be applicable.
(b) If the court determines that the violation was intentional and
involved an amount that had or could have been expected to have a
material effect on the outcome of the election, the candidate may be fined
up to twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000), or imprisoned for up to five
years, or both. Any person who is found guilty of any criminal violation
of this act shall be sentenced to at a minimum of at least one day and one
night in jail.
(1) If a candidate is convicted of a misdemeanor violation of any
provision of this chapter, the court shall make a determination as to
whether the violation had a material effect on the outcome of the election.
If the court finds such a material effect, or that a participating candidate
spent or incurred more than 10 percent above the Clean Money funding the
candidate received from the Clean Money Fund, in addition to any fines
specified in this subdivision, the candidate shall repay to the Clean Money
Fund an amount up to 10 times the value of the excess, and:
(A) if the conviction becomes final before the date of the election,
the votes for the candidate shall not be counted, and the election shall be
determined on the basis of the votes cast for the other candidates in that
race;
(B) if the conviction becomes final after the date of the election, and
if the candidate was declared to have been elected, then the candidate shall
not assume office, the office shall be deemed vacant and shall be filled as
otherwise provided by law;
(C) if the conviction becomes final after the candidate has assumed
office, then the candidate shall be removed from office, the office shall be
deemed vacant and shall be filled as otherwise provided by law; and
(D) the person convicted shall be ineligible to run for any office for
a period of five years after the date of the conviction.
(2) If a participating candidate spends or incurs more than the Clean
Money funding the candidate is given, and if it is determined by a court
not to be an amount that had or could have been expected to have had a
material effect on the outcome of the election, then the candidate shall
repay to the Clean Money Fund an amount equal to the excess.
(c) The same penalties as provided in subdivision (b) of Section
91146 and Section 91147 shall apply for determinations made by the
Commission, subject to court review.
SEC. 2. Section 13207 of the Elections Code is amended to read:
13207. (a) There shall be printed on the ballot in parallel columns
all of the following:
(1) The respective offices.
(2) The names of candidates with sufficient blank spaces to allow the
voters to write in names not printed on the ballot.
(A) Underneath the name of each candidate shall state either: “This
candidate is a participant in the public campaign funding system.” or “This
candidate is not a participant in the public campaign funding system.”
(B) The Fair Political Practices Commission shall determine
which candidates in every election covered by Chapter 12 (commencing

(PROPOSITION 89 CONTINUED)

with Section 91015) of the Government Code are participating or
nonparticipating candidates. The Fair Political Practices Commission
shall provide to the Secretary of State the information necessary to satisfy
the requirements of this paragraph (2) in a manner that will permit the
timely preparation and printing of the ballot. The Secretary of State shall
then immediately transmit the information to county election officials.
(3) Whatever measures have been submitted to the voters.
(b) In the case of a ballot which is intended for use in a party primary
and which carries both partisan offices and nonpartisan offices, a vertical
solid black line shall divide the columns containing partisan offices, on the
left, from the columns containing nonpartisan offices, on the right.
(c) The standard width of columns containing partisan and
nonpartisan offices shall be three inches, but an elections official may
vary the width of these columns up to 10 percent more or less than the
three-inch standard. However, the column containing presidential and vice
presidential candidates may be as wide as four inches.
(d) Any measures that are to be submitted to the voters shall be printed
in one or more parallel columns to the right of the columns containing the
names of candidates and shall be of sufficient width to contain the title and
summary of each measure. To the right of each title and summary shall be
printed, on separate lines, the words “Yes” and “No.”
SEC. 3. Section 82016 of the Government Code is amended to
read:
82016. Controlled Committee
(a) “Controlled committee” means a committee that is controlled
directly or indirectly by a candidate or state measure proponent or that
acts jointly with a candidate, controlled committee, or state measure
proponent in connection with the making of expenditures. A candidate or
state measure proponent controls a committee if he or she, his or her agent,
or any other committee he or she controls has a significant influence on the
actions or decisions of the committee.
(b) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), a political party committee, as
defi ned in Section 85205 91057, is not a controlled committee.
(c) For purposes of Section 91137, a candidate shall be deemed to
control a ballot measure committee if any of the following, conditions are
met:
(1) Decisions on how the committee’s funds are to be expended are
effectively directed by or coordinated with the candidate or his or her
agent;
(2) The candidate personally solicits contributions to the committee,
either telephonically or through direct oral communications with donors;
or
(3) The candidate appears in broadcast advertisements paid for by
the committee at the candidate’s behest.
SEC. 4. Section 82025 of the Government Code is amended to
read:
82025. Expenditure
(a) “Expenditure” means a payment, a forgiveness of a loan, a
payment of a loan by a third party, or an enforceable promise to make a
payment, unless it is clear from the surrounding circumstances that it is
not made for political purposes.
(b) “Expenditure” includes any monetary or nonmonetary payment
made by any person that is used:
(1) For any communications that expressly advocate the nomination,
election or defeat of a clearly identified candidate or candidates, or the
qualification. passage or defeat of a clearly identified ballot measure or
measures; or
(2) For any broadcast, cable, or satellite communications that (A)
refer to a clearly identified candidate for elective state office or to a state
ballot measure that has qualified to appear on the ballot, (B) are made within
30 days before a primary election or 60 days before a general, special, or
special runoff election for the office sought by the candidate or at which the
state ballot measure will be voted on, and (C) can be received by 50,000 or
more persons in the electoral jurisdiction in which the candidate or ballot
measure will be voted on. A candidate is “clearly identified” within the
meaning of this subdivision if the communication states his or her name,
makes unambiguous reference to his or her office or status as a candidate,
or unambiguously describes him or her in any manner. A state ballot
measure is “clearly identified” within the meaning of this subdivision if

text of proposed laws
the communication states a proposition number, official title, or popular
name associated with the measure, or if the communication refers to the
specific subject matter of the measure and either states or refers to the fact
that the measure is before the people for a vote.
(c) Notwithstanding subdivision (b), “expenditure” does not include
the costs for: (A) a communication appearing in a bona fide news story,
commentary, or editorial distributed through the facilities of any regularly
published newspaper, magazine, periodical of general circulation, or
broadcasting station, unless the facilities are owned or controlled by
any political party, committee, or candidate; (B) a communication
which constitutes a candidate debate or forum, or solely promotes such
a debate or forum, and is made by or on behalf of the person or entity
sponsoring the debate or forum; (C) a communication in a regularly
published newsletter or regularly published periodical, whose circulation
is limited to an organization’s members, employees, shareholders, other
affiliated individuals, and those who request or purchase the publication;
or (D) any other communications exempted under such regulations as the
Commission may promulgate to ensure the appropriate implementation of
this section consistent with the requirements of this subdivision.
(d) “Expenditure” does not include a candidate’s use of his or her
own money to pay for either a filing fee for a declaration of candidacy or
a candidate statement prepared pursuant to Section 13307 of the Elections
Code.
(e) An expenditure is made on the date the payment is made or on the
date consideration, if any, is received, whichever is earlier.
SEC. 5. Section 82031 of the Government Code is amended to
read:
82031. Independent Expenditure
“Independent expenditure” means an expenditure, as defined in
Section 82025, subdivision (b), made by any person in connection with a
communication which expressly advocates the election or defeat of a clearly
identified candidate or the qualification, passage or defeat of a clearly
identified measure, or taken as a whole and in context, unambiguously
urges a particular result in an election but which is not made to, or at the
behest of, or in coordination with the affected candidate or committee.
SEC. 6. Section 85203 of the Government Code is repealed.
85203. “Small contributor committee” means any committee that
meets all of the following criteria:
(a) The committee has been in existence for at least six months.
(b) The committee receives contributions from 100 or more
persons.
(c) No one person has contributed to the committee more than two
hundred dollars ($200) per calendar year.
(d) The committee makes contributions to five or more candidates.
SEC. 6.1. Section 85205 of the Government Code is repealed.
85205. “Political party committee” means the state central
committee or county central committee of an organization that meets the
requirements for recognition as a political party pursuant to Section 5100
of the Elections Code.
SEC. 6.2. Section 85206 of the Government Code is repealed.
85206. “Public moneys” has the same meaning as defi ned in Section
426 of the Penal Code.
SEC. 6.3. Section 85300 of the Government Code is repealed.
85300. No public officer shall expend and no candidate shall accept
any public moneys for the purpose of seeking elective office.
SEC. 6.4. Section 85302 of the Government Code is repealed.
85302. (a) A small contributor committee may not make to any
candidate for elective state office other than a candidate for statewide
elective office, and a candidate for elective state office, other than a
candidate for statewide elective office may not accept from a small
contributor committee, any contribution totaling more than six thousand
dollars ($6,000) per election.
(b) Except to a candidate for Governor, a small contributor committee
may not make to any candidate for statewide elective office and except for
a candidate for Governor, a candidate for statewide elective office may not
accept from a small contributor committee, any contribution totaling more
than ten thousand dollars ($10,000) per election.
(c) A small contributor committee may not make to any candidate

Text of Proposed Laws | 183

89

text of proposed laws

89

for Governor, and a candidate for governor may not accept from a small
contributor committee, any contribution totaling more than twenty
thousand dollars ($20,000) per election.
SEC. 6.5. Section 85303 of the Government Code is repealed.
85303. (a) A person may not make to any committee, other than
a political party committee, and a committee other than a political party
committee may not accept, any contribution totaling more than five
thousand dollars ($5,000) per calendar year for the purpose of making
contributions to candidates for elective state office.
(b) A person may not make to any political party committee, and a
political party committee may not accept, any contribution totaling more
than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) per calendar year for the
purpose of making contributions for the support or defeat of candidates
for elective state office. Notwithstanding Section 85312, this limit applies
to contributions made to a political party used for the purpose of making
expenditures at the behest of a candidate for elective state office for
communications to party members related to the candidate’s candidacy for
elective state office.
(c) Except as provided in Section 85310, nothing in this chapter shall
limit a person’s contributions to a committee or political party committee
provided the contributions are used for purposes other than making
contributions to candidates for elective state office.
(d) Nothing in this chapter limits a candidate for elected state office
from transferring contributions received by the candidate in excess of any
amount necessary to defray the candidate’s expenses for election related
activities or holding office to a political party committee, provided those
transferred contributions are used for purposes consistent with paragraph
(4) of subdivision (b) of Section 89519.
SEC. 6.6. Section 85304 of the Government Code is repealed.
85304. (a) A candidate for elective state office or an elected state
officer may establish a separate account to defray attorney’s fees and other
related legal costs incurred for the candidate’s or officer’s legal defense
if the candidate or officer is subject to one or more civil or criminal
proceedings or administrative proceedings arising directly out of the
conduct of an election campaign, the electoral process, or the performance
of the officer’s governmental activities and duties. These funds may be
used only to defray those attorney fees and other related legal costs.
(b) A candidate may receive contributions to this account that are
not subject to the contribution limits set forth in this article. However,
all contributions shall be reported in a manner prescribed by the
commission.
(c) Once the legal dispute is resolved, the candidate shall dispose
of any funds remaining after all expenses associated with the dispute are
discharged for one or more of the purposes set forth in paragraphs (1) to
(5), inclusive, of subdivision (b) of Section 89519.
SEC. 6.7. Section 85305 of the Government Code is repealed.
85305. A candidate for elective state office or committee controlled
by that candidate may not make any contribution to any other candidate
for elective state office in excess of the limits set forth in subdivision (a)
of Section 85301.
SEC. 7. Section 85306 of the Government Code is amended to
read:
85306. Transfer of Funds from One Controlled Committee to
Controlled Committee of Same Candidate; Attribution to Specific
Contributors; Funds in Possession Before Specified Dates
(a) A candidate may transfer campaign funds from one controlled
committee to a controlled committee for elective state office of the
same candidate. Contributions transferred shall be attributed to specific
contributors using a “last in, fi rst out” or “fi rst in, fi rst out” accounting
method, and these attributed contributions when aggregated with all other
contributions from the same contributor may not exceed the limits set forth
in Section 85301 or 85302.
(b) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), a (a) A candidate for elective
state office, other than a candidate for statewide elective office, who
possesses campaign funds on January 1, 2001, may use those funds to seek
elective office without attributing the funds to specific contributors.
(c) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), a (b) A candidate for statewide
elective office who possesses campaign funds on November 6, 2002, may
use those funds to seek elective office without attributing the funds to

184 | Text of Proposed Laws

specific contributors.
(c) Notwithstanding Section 91137, a candidate may transfer funds
without limitation from one ballot measure committee controlled by the
candidate to another ballot measure committee controlled by the same
candidate.
SEC. 8. Section 85314 of the Government Code is repealed.
85314. The contribution limits of this chapter apply to special
elections and apply to special runoff elections. A special election and
a special runoff election are separate elections for purposes of the
contribution and voluntary expenditure limits set forth in this chapter.
SEC. 8.1. Section 85317 of the Government Code is repealed.
85317. Notwithstanding subdivision (a) of Section 85306, a
candidate for elective state office may carry over contributions raised
in connection with one election for elective state office to pay campaign
expenditures incurred in connection with a subsequent election for the
same elective state office.
SEC. 8.2. Section 85318 of the Government Code is repealed.
85318. A candidate for elective state office may raise contributions
for a general election prior to the primary election, and for a special
general election prior to a special primary election, for the same elective
state office if the candidate sets aside these contributions and uses these
contributions for the general election or special general election. If the
candidate for elective state office is defeated in the primary election or
special primary election, or otherwise withdraws from the general election
or special general election, the general election or special general election
funds shall be refunded to the contributors on a pro rata basis less any
expenses associated with the raising and administration of general election
or special general election contributions. Notwithstanding Section 85201,
candidates for elective state office may establish separate campaign
contribution accounts for the primary and general elections or special
primary and special general elections.
SEC. 8.3. Section 85400 of the Government Code is repealed.
85400. (a) A candidate for elective state office, other than the
Board of Administration of the Public Employees’ Retirement System,
who voluntarily accepts expenditure limits may not make campaign
expenditures in excess of the following:
(1) For an Assembly candidate, four hundred thousand dollars
($400,000) in the primary or special primary election and seven hundred
thousand dollars ($700,000) in the general or special general election.
(2) For a Senate candidate, six hundred thousand dollars ($600,000)
in the primary or special primary election and nine hundred thousand
dollars ($900,000) in the general or special general election.
(3) For a candidate for the State Board of Equalization, one million
dollars ($1,000,000) in the primary election and one million five hundred
thousand dollars ($1,500,000) in the general election.
(4) For a statewide candidate other than a candidate for Governor
or the State Board of Equalization, four million dollars ($4,000,000) in
the primary election and six million dollars ($6,000,000) in the general
election.
(5) For a candidate for Governor, six million dollars ($6,000,000) in
the primary election and ten million dollars ($10,000,000) in the general
election.
(b) For purposes of this section, “campaign expenditures” has the
same meaning as “election-related activities” as defi ned in clauses (i) to
(vi), inclusive, and clause (viii) of subparagraph (C) of paragraph (2) of
subdivision (b) of Section 82015.
(c) A campaign expenditure made by a political party on behalf
of a candidate may not be attributed to the limitations on campaign
expenditures set forth in this section.
SEC. 8.4. Section 85401 of the Government Code is repealed.
85401. (a) Each candidate for elective state office shall file a
statement of acceptance or rejection of the voluntary expenditure limits set
forth in Section 85400 at the time he or she files the statement of intention
specified in Section 85200.
(b) A candidate may, until the deadline for filing nomination papers
set forth in Section 8020 of the Elections Code, change his or her statement
of acceptance or rejection of voluntary expenditure limits provided he or
she has not exceeded the voluntary expenditure limits. A candidate may
not change his or her statement of acceptance or rejection of voluntary

(PROPOSITION 89 CONTINUED)

expenditure limits more than twice after the candidate’s initial filing of the
statement of intention for that election and office.
(c) Any candidate for elective state office who declined to accept
the voluntary expenditure limits but who nevertheless does not exceed
the limits in the primary, special primary, or special election, may file a
statement of acceptance of the expenditure limits for a general or special
runoff election within 14 days following the primary, special primary, or
special election.
(d) Notwithstanding Section 81004.5 or any other provision of this
title, a candidate may not change his or her statement of acceptance or
rejection of voluntary expenditure limits other than as provided for by this
section and Section 85402.
SEC. 8.5. Section 85402 of the Government Code is repealed.
85402. (a) Any candidate for elective state office who has filed a
statement accepting the voluntary expenditure limits is not bound by those
limits if an opposing candidate contributes personal funds to his or her
own campaign in excess of the limits set forth in Section 85400.
(b) The commission shall require by regulation timely notification
by candidates for elective state office who make personal contributions to
their own campaign.
SEC. 8.6. Section 85403 of the Government Code is repealed.
85403. Any candidate who files a statement of acceptance pursuant
to Section 85401 and makes campaign expenditures in excess of the limits
shall be subject to the remedies in Chapter 3 (commencing with Section
83100) and Chapter 11 (commencing with Section 91000).
SEC. 8.7. Section 85501 of the Government Code is repealed.
85501. A controlled committee of a candidate may not make
independent expenditures and may not contribute funds to another
committee for the purpose of making independent expenditures to support
or oppose other candidates.
SEC. 8.8. Section 85600 of the Government Code is repealed.
85600. The Secretary of State shall designate in the state ballot
pamphlet those candidates for statewide elective office, as defi ned in
Section 82053, who have voluntarily agreed to the expenditure limitations
set forth in Section 85400. Local elections officers shall designate in the
voter information portion of the sample ballot those candidates for State
Senate and Assembly who have voluntarily agreed to the expenditure
limitations set forth in Section 85400.
SEC. 8.9. Section 85601 of the Government Code is repealed.
85601. (a) A candidate for statewide elective office, as defi ned in
Section 82053, who accepts the voluntary expenditure limits set forth in
Section 85400 may purchase the space to place a statement in the state
ballot pamphlet that does not exceed 250 words. The statement may not
make any reference to any opponent of the candidate. The statement shall
be submitted in accordance with timeframes and procedures set forth by
the Secretary of State for the preparation of the state ballot pamphlets.
(b) Notwithstanding subdivision (e) of Section 88001 of this code
or subdivision (e) of Section 9084 of the Elections Code, on and after
November 6, 2002, the Secretary of State may not include in the state ballot
pamphlet a statement from a candidate who has not voluntarily agreed to
the expenditure limitations set forth in Section 85400.
(c) A candidate for State Senate or Assembly who accepts the
voluntary expenditure limits set forth in Section 85400 may purchase the
space to place a statement in the voter information portion of the sample
ballot that does not exceed 250 words. The statement may not make
any reference to any opponent of the candidate. The statement shall be
submitted in accordance with the timeframes and procedures set forth in
the Elections Code for the preparation of the voter information portion of
the sample ballot.
SEC. 8.10. Section 85702 of the Government Code is repealed.
85702. An elected state officer or candidate for elected state office
may not accept a contribution from a lobbyist, and a lobbyist may not
make a contribution to an elected state officer or candidate for elected state
office, if that lobbyist is registered to lobby the governmental agency for
which the candidate is seeking election or the governmental agency of the
elected state officer.
SEC. 9. Section 23151 of the Revenue and Taxation Code is amended
to read:
23151. Imposition of privilege tax; Rates

text of proposed laws
(a) With the exception of banks and fi nancial corporations, every
corporation doing business within the limits of this state and not expressly
exempted from taxation by the provisions of the Constitution of this state
or by this part, shall annually pay to the state, for the privilege of exercising
its corporate franchises within this state, a tax according to or measured by
its net income, to be computed at the rate of 7.6 percent upon the basis of its
net income for the next preceding income year, or if greater, the minimum
tax specified in Section 23153.
(b) For calendar or fiscal years ending after June 30, 1973,
the rate of tax shall be 9 percent instead of 7.6 percent as provided by
subdivision (a).
(c) For calendar or fiscal years ending in 1980 to 1986, inclusive, the
rate of tax shall be 9.6 percent.
(d) For calendar or fiscal years ending in 1987 to 1996, inclusive, and
for any income year beginning before January 1, 1997, the tax rate shall
be 9.3 percent.
(e) For any income year beginning on or after January 1, 1997, the tax
rate shall be 8.84 percent. The change in rate provided in this subdivision
shall be made without proration otherwise required by Section 24251.
(f)(1) For the fi rst taxable year beginning on or after January 1,
2000, the tax imposed under this section shall be the sum of both of the
following:
(A) A tax according to or measured by net income, to be computed
at the rate of 8.84 percent upon the basis of the net income for the next
preceding income year, but not less than the minimum tax specified in
Section 23153.
(B) A tax according to or measured by net income, to be computed at
the rate of 8.84 percent upon the basis of the net income for the fi rst taxable
year beginning on or after January 1, 2000, but not less than the minimum
tax specified in Section 23153.
(2) Except as provided in paragraph (1), for taxable years beginning
on or after January 1, 2000, the tax imposed under this section shall be a
tax according to or measured by net income, to be computed at the rate of
8.84 percent upon the basis of the net income for that taxable year, but not
less than the minimum tax specified in Section 23153.
(g)(1) For the first taxable year beginning on or after January 1,
2007, the tax imposed under this section shall be the sum of both of the
following:
(A) A tax according to or measured by net income, to be computed
at the rate of 9.04 percent upon the basis of the net income for the next
preceding income year, but not less than the minimum tax specified in
Section 23153.
(B) A tax according to or measured by net income, to be computed at
the rate of 9.04 percent upon the basis of the net income for the first taxable
year beginning on or after January 1, 2007, but not less than the minimum
tax specified in Section 23153.
(2) Except as provided in paragraph (1), for taxable years beginning
on or after January 1, 2007, the tax imposed under this section shall be a
tax according to or measured by net income, to be computed at the rate of
9.04 percent upon the basis of the net income for that taxable year, but not
less than the minimum tax specified in Section 23153.
SEC. 9.1. Section 23181 of the Revenue and Taxation Code is
amended to read:
23181. Annual tax on banks
(a) Except as otherwise provided herein, an annual tax is hereby
imposed upon every bank doing business within the limits of this state
according to or measured by its net income, upon the basis of its net income
for the next preceding income year at the rate provided under Section
23186.
(b) If a bank commences to do business and ceases doing business
in the same taxable year, the tax for such taxable year shall be according
to or measured by its net income for such year, at the rate provided under
Section 23186.
(c) With respect to a bank, other than a bank described in subdivision
(b), which ceases doing business after December 31, 1972, the tax for the
taxable year of cessation shall be:
(1) According to or measured by its net income for the next preceding
income year, to be computed at the rate prescribed in Section 23186, plus
(2) According to or measured by its net income for the income year

Text of Proposed Laws | 185

89

text of proposed laws

89

during which the bank ceased doing business, to be computed at the rate
prescribed in Section 23186.
(d) In the case of a bank which ceased doing business before January
1, 1973, but dissolves or withdraws on such date or thereafter, the tax for the
taxable year of dissolution or withdrawal shall be according to or measured
by its net income for the income year during which the bank ceased doing
business, unless such income has previously been included in the measure
of tax for any taxable year, to be computed at the rate prescribed under
Section 23186 for the taxable year of dissolution or withdrawal.
(e) Commencing with income years ending in 1980, every bank shall
pay to the state a minimum tax (determined in accordance with Section
23153) or the measured tax imposed on its income, whichever is greater.
(f)(l) For the fi rst taxable year beginning on or after January 1,
2000, the tax imposed under this section shall be the sum of both of the
following:
(A) A tax according to or measured by net income, to be computed
at the rate provided under Section 23186 upon the basis of the net income
for the next preceding income year, but not less than the minimum tax
specified in Section 23153.
(B) A tax according to or measured by net income, to be computed
at the rate provided under Section 23186 upon the basis of the net income
for the fi rst taxable year beginning on or after January 1, 2000, but not less
than the minimum tax specified in Section 23153.
(2) Except as provided in paragraph (1), for taxable years beginning
on or after January 1, 2000, the tax imposed under this section shall be
a tax according to or measured by net income, to be computed at the
rate provided under Section 23186 upon the basis of the net income for
that taxable year, but not less than the minimum tax specified in Section
23153.
(g)(1) For the first taxable year beginning on or after January 1,
2007, the tax imposed under this section shall be the sum of both of the
following:
(A) A tax according to or measured by net income, to be computed
at the rate of 11.04 percent upon the basis of the net income for the next
preceding income year, but not less than the minimum tax specified in
Section 23153.
(B) A tax according to or measured by net income, to be computed
at the rate of 11.04 percent upon the basis of the net income for the first
taxable year beginning on or after January 1, 2007, but not less than the
minimum tax specified in Section 23153.
(2) Except as provided in paragraph (1), for taxable years beginning
on or after January 1, 2007, the tax imposed under this section shall be a
tax according to or measured by net income, to be computed at the rate of
11.04 percent upon the basis of the net income for that taxable year, but not
less than the minimum tax specified in Section 23153.
SEC. 9.2. Section 23183 of the Revenue and Taxation Code is
amended to read:
23183. Financial corporations; Annual tax; Measurement by
income; Rate
(a) For taxable years beginning before January 1, 2000, an annual tax
is hereby imposed upon every fi nancial corporation doing business within
the limits of this state and taxable under the provisions of Section 27 of
Article XIII of the Constitution of this state, for the privilege of exercising
its corporate franchises within this state, according to or measured by its
net income, upon the basis of its net income for the next preceding income
year at the rate provided under Section 23186.
(b) For purposes of this article, the term “fi nancial corporation”
does not include any corporation, including a wholly owned subsidiary of
a bank or bank holding company, if the principal business activity of such
entity consists of leasing tangible personal property.
(c)(l) For the fi rst taxable year beginning on or after January 1,
2000, the tax imposed under this section shall be the sum of both of the
following:
(A) A tax according to or measured by net income, to be computed
at the rate provided under Section 23186 upon the basis of the net income
for the next preceding income year, but not less than the minimum tax
specified in Section 23153.
(B) A tax according to or measured by net income, to be computed
at the rate provided under Section 23186 upon the basis of the net income
for the fi rst taxable year beginning on or after January 1, 2000, but not less

186 | Text of Proposed Laws

than the minimum tax specified in Section 23153.
(2) Except as provided in paragraph (1), for taxable years beginning
on or after January 1, 2000, the tax imposed under this section shall be
a tax according to or measured by net income, to be computed at the
rate provided under Section 23186 upon the basis of the net income for
that taxable year, but not less than the minimum tax specified in Section
23153.
(d)(1) For the first taxable year beginning on or after January 1,
2007, the tax imposed under this section shall be the sum of both of the
following:
(A) A tax according to or measured by net income, to be computed
at the rate of 11.04 percent upon the basis of the net income for the next
preceding income year, but not less than the minimum tax specified in
Section 23153.
(B) A tax according to or measured by net income, to be computed
at the rate of 11.04 percent upon the basis of the net income for the first
taxable year beginning on or after January 1, 2007, but not less than the
minimum tax specified in Section 23153.
(2) Except as provided in paragraph (1), for taxable years beginning
on or after January 1, 2007, the tax imposed under this section shall be a
tax according to or measured by net income, to be computed at the rate of
11.04 percent upon the basis of the net income for that taxable year, but not
less than the minimum tax specified in Section 23153.
SEC. 9.3. Section 23501 of the Revenue and Taxation Code is
amended to read:
23501. Annual tax imposed; Rates
(a) There shall be imposed upon every corporation, other than a
bank, for each taxable year, a tax at the rate of 7.6 percent upon its net
income derived from sources within this state on or after January 1, 1937,
other than income for any period for which the corporation is subject to
taxation under Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 23101), according to
or measured by its net income.
(b) For calendar or fiscal years ending after June 30, 1973, the rate of
tax shall be 9 percent instead of 7.6 percent as provided by subdivision (a).
(c) For calendar or fiscal years ending after December 31, 1979, the
rate of tax shall be the rate specified for those years by Section 23151.
(d) For calendar or fiscal years ending after December 31, 2006, the
rate of tax shall be the rate specified for those years by Section 23151.
SEC. 9.4. Section 23811 of the Revenue and Taxation Code is
amended to read:
23811. Tax on passive investment income attributable to California
sources
Except as otherwise provided in this section, there is hereby imposed
a tax on passive investment income attributable to California sources,
determined in accordance with the provisions of Section 1375 of the Internal
Revenue Code, relating to tax imposed on passive investment income, as
modified by this section. For taxable years beginning on or after January
1, 2007, the tax imposed on passive investment income shall be increased
from 1.5 percent to 1.66 percent of taxable net passive investment income
for the next preceding income year for corporations with over $50 million
dollars in total receipts.
(a) The tax imposed under this section may not be imposed on an
“S corporation” that has no excess net passive income for federal income
tax purposes determined in accordance with Section 1375 of the Internal
Revenue Code.
(b)(1) The rate of tax shall be equal to the rate of tax imposed under
Section 23151 in lieu of Section 11(b) of the Internal Revenue Code.
(2) In the case of an “S corporation” that is also a fi nancial
corporation, the rate of tax specified in paragraph (1) shall be increased by
the excess of the rate imposed under Section 23183 over the rate imposed
under Section 23151.
(c) Section 1375(c)(l) of the Internal Revenue Code, relating to
credits, is modified to provide that the tax imposed under subdivision (a)
may not be reduced by any credits allowed under this part.
(d) The term “subchapter C earnings and profits” or “accumulated
earnings and profits” as used in Section 1375 of the Internal Revenue Code
shall mean the “subchapter C earnings and profits” of the corporation
attributable to California sources determined under this part, modified as
provided in subdivision (e).

(PROPOSITION 89 CONTINUED)

(e)(1) In the case of a corporation that is an “S corporation” for
purposes of this part for its fi rst taxable year for which it has in effect a valid
federal S election, there shall be allowed as a deduction in determining
that corporation’s “subchapter C earnings and profits” at the close of any
taxable year the amount of any consent dividend (as provided in paragraph
(2)) paid after the close of that taxable year.
(2) In the event there is a determination that a corporation described
in paragraph (1) has “subchapter C earnings and profits” at the close of
any taxable year, that corporation shall be entitled to distribute a consent
dividend to its shareholders. The amount of the consent dividend may not
exceed the difference between the corporation’s “subchapter C earnings
and profits” determined under subdivision (d) at the close of the taxable
year with respect to which the determination is made and the corporation’s
“subchapter C earnings and profits” for federal income tax purposes at
the same date. A consent dividend must be paid within 90 days of the
date of the determination that the corporation has “subchapter C earnings
and profits.” For this purpose, the date of a determination means the
effective date of a closing agreement pursuant to Section 19441, the date
an assessment of tax imposed by this section becomes fi nal, or the date of
execution by the corporation of an agreement with the Franchise Tax Board
relating to liability for the tax imposed by this section. For purposes of Part
10 (commencing with Section 17001), Part 10.2 (commencing with Section
18401), and this part, a corporation must make the election provided in
Section 1368(e)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
(3) If a corporation distributes a consent dividend, it shall claim
the deduction provided in paragraph (1) by filing a claim therefor with
the Franchise Tax Board within 120 days of the date of the determination
specified in paragraph (2).
(4) The collection of tax imposed by this section from a corporation
described in paragraph (2) shall be stayed for 120 days after the date of
the determination specified in paragraph (2). If a claim is filed pursuant to
paragraph (3), collection of that tax shall be further stayed until the date
the claim is acted upon by the Franchise Tax Board.
(5) If a claim is filed pursuant to paragraph (3), the running of
the statute of limitations on the making of assessments and actions for
collection of the tax imposed by this section shall be suspended for a period
of two years after the date of the determination specified in paragraph (2).
SEC. 10. Section 24586 is added to the Revenue and Taxation Code,
to read:
24586. (a) The Franchise Tax Board shall annually determine the
total amount of the fees generated by increases in the tax rates for tax
years beginning January 1, 2007, and thereafter pursuant to Revenue and
Taxation Code Sections 23151, 23181, 23183, 23501, and 23811, and notify
the Controller of that amount.
(b) The Controller shall transfer the amount determined under
subdivision (a), less the direct, actual costs of the Franchise Tax Board
and the Controller for the collection and administration of funds under
this article, to the California Clean Money Fund, established pursuant to
Section 91133 of the Government Code, for use in funding clean and fair
elections for non-federal statewide and state legislative elections. Upon
appropriation by the Legislature, the Controller shall transfer the amount
of reimbursement for direct actual costs incurred by the Franchise Tax
Board and the Office of the Controller in the administration of this fund.
(c) All funds deposited in the California Clean Money Fund shall be
allocated, in accordance with Section 91133 of the Government Code, to
the Fair Political Practices Commission for disbursement for the purposes
and in the manner described in Section 91133 of the Government Code.
(d) This section shall remain in effect so long as Chapter 12
(commencing with Section 91015) of Title 9 of the Government Code, also
known as the California Clean Money and Fair Elections Act of 2006,
requires the establishment and maintenance of the California Clean
Money Fund.
SEC. 11. No reimbursement is required by this act pursuant to
Section 6 of Article XIII B of the California Constitution because the
only costs that may be incurred by a local agency or school district will
be incurred because this act creates a new crime or infraction, eliminates
a crime or infraction, or changes the penalty for a crime or infraction,
within the meaning of Section 17556 of the Government Code, or changes
the defi nition of a crime within the meaning of Section 6 of Article XIII B
of the California Constitution.
SEC. 12. This chapter shall be deemed to amend the Political

text of proposed laws
Reform Act of 1974 as amended and all of its provisions that do not conflict
with this chapter shall apply to the provisions of this chapter.
SEC. 13. Severability
(a) The provisions of this act are severable. If any provision or
portion of provision of this act or the application of any provision of
this act to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions or
applications of the act that can be given effect without the invalid provision
or application.
(b) In adopting this measure, the People specifically declare that the
provision of this act adding Section 91139 to the the Government Code shall
be severable from the remainder of this act, and the People specifically
declare their desire and intent to enact the remainder of this act even if that
provision were not to be given full or partial effect. The People recognize
that a Montana law prohibiting corporate contributions or expenditures
in connection with a ballot measure election was invalidated in 2000 by a
divided panel of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals in Montana Chamber
of Commerce v. Argenbright, but believe that the majority opinion in that
case incorrectly interpreted relevant decisions of the United States Supreme
Court in this area and that more recent decisions of the Supreme Court
support the People’s rationale for limiting corporate campaign spending in
order to eliminate the distorting effects of corporate wealth on the electoral
process. Moreover, the People are adopting the prohibitions in this act
based upon an evidentiary record and history of California ballot measure
elections that compellingly demonstrates the need for the narrowly tailored
restrictions contained herein.
SEC. 14. Construction and Amendment
This act shall be broadly construed to accomplish its purposes. This
act may be amended to further its purposes by a statute, passed in each
house by roll call vote entered in the journal, two-thirds of the membership
concurring and signed by the Governor, if at least 12 days prior to passage
in each house the bill in its fi nal form has been delivered to the California
Fair Political Practices Commission for distribution to the news media
and to every person who has requested the Commission to send copies
of such bills to him or her. Any such amendment must be consistent with
the purposes and must further the intent of this act. Notwithstanding this
provision, amendments to adjust for changes in the cost of living may be
made pursuant to Section 91145.
SEC. 15. Effective Date
This act shall become effective immediately upon its approval by the
voters and shall apply to all elections held on or after January 1, 2007.
SEC. 16. Conflicting Ballot Measures
(a) If a conflict exists between the provisions of this measure and
the provisions of any other measure approved by the voters at the same
election, the provisions of this measure shall take effect except to the
extent that they are in direct and irreconcilable conflict with the provisions
of such other measure and the other measure receives a greater number of
affi rmative votes.
(b) If any provisions of this measure are superseded by the provisions
of any other conflicting ballot measure approved by the voters and
receiving a greater number of affi rmative votes at the same election, and the
conflicting ballot measure is subsequently held to be invalid, the provisions
of this measure shall be self-executing and shall be given full force of law.

PROPOSITION 90
This initiative measure is submitted to the people in accordance with
the provisions of Article II, Section 8 of the California Constitution.
This initiative measure expressly amends the California Constitution
by amending a section thereof; therefore, new provisions proposed to be
added are printed in italic type to indicate that they are new.
PROPOSED LAW

89
90

SECTION 1. STATEMENT OF FINDINGS
(a) The California Constitution provides that no person shall be
deprived of property without due process of law and allows government
to take or damage private property only for a public use and only after
payment to the property owner of just compensation.
(b) Despite these constitutional protections, state and local

Text of Proposed Laws | 187

text of proposed laws

90

governments have undermined private property rights through an excessive
use of eminent domain power and the regulation of private property for
purposes unrelated to public health and safety.
(c) Neither the federal nor the California courts have protected
the full scope of private property rights found in the state constitution.
The courts have allowed local governments to exercise eminent domain
powers to advance private economic interests in the face of protests
from affected homeowners and neighborhood groups. The courts have
not required government to pay compensation to property owners when
enacting statutes, charter provisions, ordinances, resolutions, laws, rules
or regulations not related to public health and safety that reduce the value
of private property.
(d) As currently structured, the judicial process in California available
to property owners to pursue property rights claims is cumbersome and
costly.
SEC. 2. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
(a) The power of eminent domain available to government in
California shall be limited to projects of public use. Examples of public use
projects include, but are not limited to, road construction, the creation of
public parks, the creation of public facilities, land-use planning, property
zoning, and actions to preserve the public health and safety.
(b) Public use projects that the government assigns, contracts or
otherwise arranges for private entities to perform shall retain the power
of eminent domain. Examples of public use projects that private entities
perform include, but are not limited to, the construction and operation of
private toll roads and privately-owned prison facilities.
(c) Whenever government takes or damages private property
for a public use, the owner of any affected property shall receive just
compensation for the property taken or damaged. Just compensation
shall be set at fair market value for property taken and diminution of fair
market value for property damaged. Whenever a property owner and the
government cannot agree on fair compensation, the California courts shall
provide through a jury trial a fair and timely process for the settlement of
disputes.
(d) This constitutional amendment shall apply prospectively. Its
terms shall apply to any eminent domain proceeding brought by a public
agency not yet subject to a fi nal adjudication. No statute, charter provision,
ordinance, resolution, law, rule or regulation in effect on the date of
enactment that results or has resulted in a substantial loss to the value of
private property shall be subject to the new provisions of Section 19 of
Article 1.
(e) Therefore, the people of the state of California hereby enact “The
Protect Our Homes Act.”
SEC 3. Section. 19 of Article I of the California Constitution is
amended to read:
SEC. 19. (a)(1) Private property may be taken or damaged only
for a stated public use and only when just compensation, ascertained by
a jury unless waived, has fi rst been paid to, or into court for, the owner.
Private property may not be taken or damaged for private use.
(2) Property taken by eminent domain shall be owned and occupied
by the condemnor, or another governmental agency utilizing the property
for the stated public use by agreement with the condemnor, or may be
leased to entities that are regulated by the Public Utilities Commission or
any other entity that the government assigns, contracts or arranges with to
perform a public use project. All property that is taken by eminent domain
shall be used only for the stated public use.
(3) If any property taken through eminent domain after the effective
date of this subdivision ceases to be used for the stated public use, the
former owner of the property or a beneficiary or an heir, if a beneficiary or
heir has been designated for this purpose, shall have the right to reacquire
the property for the fair market value of the property before the property
may be otherwise sold or transferred. Notwithstanding subdivision (a)
of Section 2 of Article XIII A, upon reacquisition the property shall be
appraised by the assessor for purposes of property taxation at its base
year value, with any authorized adjustments, as had been last determined
in accordance with Article XIII A at the time the property was acquired by
the condemnor.
(4) The Legislature may provide for possession by the condemnor
following commencement of eminent domain proceedings upon deposit in
court and prompt release to the owner of money determined by the court to

188 | Text of Proposed Laws

be the probable amount of just compensation.
(b) For purposes of applying this section:
(1) “Public use” shall have a distinct and more narrow meaning than
the term “public purpose”; its limiting effect prohibits takings expected to
result in transfers to nongovernmental owners on economic development
or tax revenue enhancement grounds, or for any other actual uses that are
not public in fact, even though these uses may serve otherwise legitimate
public purposes.
(2) Public use shall not include the direct or indirect transfer of any
possessory interest in property taken in an eminent domain proceeding
from one private party to another private party unless that transfer
proceeds pursuant to a government assignment, contract or arrangement
with a private entity whereby the private entity performs a public use
project. In all eminent domain actions, the government shall have the
burden to prove public use.
(3) Unpublished eminent domain judicial opinions or orders shall
be null and void.
(4) In all eminent domain actions, prior to the government’s
occupancy, a property owner shall be given copies of all appraisals by
the government and shall be entitled, at the property owner’s election, to a
separate and distinct determination by a superior court jury, as to whether
the taking is actually for a public use.
(5) If a public use is determined, the taken or damaged property
shall be valued at its highest and best use without considering any future
dedication requirements imposed by the government. If private property is
taken for any proprietary governmental purpose, then the property shall
be valued at the use to which the government intends to put the property, if
such use results in a higher value for the land taken.
(6) In all eminent domain actions, “ just compensation” shall be
defined as that sum of money necessary to place the property owner in
the same position monetarily, without any governmental offsets, as if the
property had never been taken. “Just compensation” shall include, but is
not limited to, compounded interest and all reasonable costs and expenses
actually incurred.
(7) In all eminent domain actions, “ fair market” value shall be
defined as the highest price the property would bring on the open market.
(8) Except when taken to protect public health and safety, “damage”
to private property includes government actions that result in substantial
economic loss to private property. Examples of substantial economic loss
include, but are not limited to, the downzoning of private property, the
elimination of any access to private property, and limitations on the use
of private air space. “Government action” shall mean any statute, charter
provision, ordinance, resolution, law, rule or regulation.
(9) A property owner shall not be liable to the government for
attorney fees or costs in any eminent domain action.
(10) For all provisions contained in this section, “government” shall
be defined as the State of California, its political subdivisions, agencies,
any public or private agent acting on their behalf, and any public or private
entity that has the power of eminent domain.
(c) Nothing in this section shall prohibit the California Public Utilities
Commission from regulating public utility rates.
(d) Nothing in this section shall restrict administrative powers to take
or damage private property under a declared state of emergency.
(e) Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of condemnation
powers to abate nuisances such as blight, obscenity, pornography, hazardous
substances or environmental conditions, provided those condemnations are
limited to abatement of specific conditions on specific parcels.
SEC. 4. IMPLEMENTATION AND AMENDMENT
This section shall be self-executing. The Legislature may adopt laws
to further the purposes of this section and aid in its implementation. No
amendment to this section may be made except by a vote of the people
pursuant to Article II or Article XVIII of the California Constitution.
SEC. 5. SEVERABILITY
The provisions of this section are severable. If any provision of this
section or its application is held invalid, that fi nding shall not affect other
provisions or applications that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.
SEC. 6. EFFECTIVE DATE
This section shall become effective on the day following the election

(PROPOSITION 90 CONTINUED

text of proposed laws

pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 10 of Article II of the California
Constitution.
The provisions of this section shall apply immediately to any eminent
domain proceeding by a public agency in which there has been no fi nal
adjudication.
Other than eminent domain powers, the provisions added to this
section shall not apply to any statute, charter provision, ordinance,
resolution, law, rule or regulation in effect on the date of enactment that
results in substantial economic loss to private property. Any statute,
charter provision, ordinance, resolution, law, rule or regulation in effect
on the date of enactment that is amended after the date of enactment shall
continue to be exempt from the provisions added to this section provided
that the amendment both serves to promote the original policy of the statute,
charter provision, ordinance, resolution, law, rule or regulation and does
not significantly broaden the scope of application of the statute, charter
provision, ordinance, resolution, law, rule or regulation being amended.
The governmental entity making the amendment shall make a declaration
contemporaneously with enactment of the amendment that the amendment
promotes the original policy of the statute, charter provision, ordinance,
resolution, law, rule or regulation and does not significantly broaden its
scope of application. The question of whether an amendment significantly
broadens the scope of application is subject to judicial review.

90

Text of Proposed Laws | 189

THE PROCESS OF VOTING ABSENTEE
Any registered voter may vote by absentee ballot. Rather than go to the polls to cast a ballot on
Election Day, you may apply for an absentee ballot, which you will need to complete and return to
your elections official.
To apply for an absentee ballot, you may use the application printed on your Sample Ballot, which you
will receive prior to every election, or apply in writing to your county elections official. You will need
to submit a completed application or letter to your county elections official between 29 days and 7 days
before the election. The application or letter must contain:
1.

your name and residence address as stated on your registration card;

2.

the address to which the absentee ballot should be sent (if different than your registered
address);

3.

the name and date of the election in which you would like to vote absentee; and

4.

the date and your signature.

Once your application is processed by your county elections official, the proper ballot type/style will be
sent to you. After you have voted, insert your ballot in the envelope provided for this purpose, making
sure you complete all required information on the envelope. You may return your voted absentee ballot
by:
1.

mailing it to your county elections official;

2.

returning it in person to a polling place or elections office within your county on Election
Day; or

3.

authorizing a legally allowable third party (relative or person residing in the same household
as you) to return the ballot on your behalf.

Regardless of how the ballot is returned, it MUST be received by the time polls close (8 p.m.) on
Election Day. Late-arriving absentee ballots are not counted.
Once your voted absentee ballot is received by your county elections official, your signature on the
absentee ballot return envelope will be compared to the signature on your voter registration card to
determine that you are the authorized voter. To preserve the secrecy of your ballot, the ballot will then
be separated from the envelope and the ballot becomes as anonymous and secret as any other ballot.
Apply to Be a Permanent Vote-By-Mail Voter:

Any voter may apply for PERMANENT ABSENT VOTER STATUS (Elections Code § 3201). These
voters are automatically sent a vote-by-mail ballot for every election without having to fill out an
application every time. Please contact your county elections official to apply to become a permanent
vote-by-mail voter if you wish to receive vote-by-mail ballots for all future elections. To find out
who your county elections official is, go online at www.ss.ca.gov/elections/elections_d.htm to see a
list of contact information for all county elections officials.

190 | Process of Voting Absentee

voter bill of rights
1. You have the right to cast a ballot if you are a valid
registered voter.
A valid registered voter means a United States citizen
who is a resident in this state, who is at least 18 years
of age and not in prison or on parole for conviction
of a felony, and who is registered to vote at his or her
current residence address.

2. You have the right to cast a provisional ballot if
your name is not listed on the voting rolls.
3. You have the right to cast a ballot if you are present
and in line at the polling place prior to the close of
the polls.
4. You have the right to cast a secret ballot free from
intimidation.
5. You have the right to receive a new ballot if, prior to
casting your ballot, you believe you made a mistake.
If at any time before you finally cast your ballot, you feel
you have made a mistake, you have the right to exchange
the spoiled ballot for a new ballot. Absentee voters may
also request and receive a new ballot if they return their
spoiled ballot to an elections official prior to the closing
of the polls on election day.

6. You have the right to receive assistance in
casting your ballot, if you are unable to vote
without assistance.
7. You have the right to return a completed
absentee ballot to any precinct in the county.
8. You have the right to election materials in another
language, if there are sufficient residents in
your precinct to warrant production.
9. You have the right to ask questions about
election procedures and observe the elections
process.
You have the right to ask questions of the precinct
board and election officials regarding election
procedures and to receive an answer or be directed
to the appropriate official for an answer. However, if
persistent questioning disrupts the execution of their
duties, the board or election officials may discontinue
responding to questions.
10. You have the right to report any illegal or
fraudulent activity to a local elections official or to
the Secretary of State’s Office.

If you believe you have been denied any of these rights, or if you are aware of any election fraud
or misconduct, please call the Secretary of State’s confidential toll-free
Voter Protection Hotline at 1-800-345-VOTE (8683).
Information on your voter registration affidavit will be used by elections officials to send you official information on the
voting process, such as the location of your polling place and the issues and candidates that will appear on the ballot.
Commercial use of voter registration information is prohibited by law and is a misdemeanor. Voter information may
be provided to a candidate for office, a ballot measure committee, or other person for election, scholarly, journalistic,
political, or governmental purposes, as determined by the Secretary of State. Driver’s license and social security
numbers, or your signature as shown on your voter registration card, cannot be released for these purposes. If you have
any questions about the use of voter information or wish to report suspected misuse of such information, please call
the Secretary of State’s Voter Protection and Assistance Hotline at 1-800-345-VOTE.
Certain voters facing life-threatening situations may qualify for confidential voter status. For more information,
please contact the Secretary of State’s Safe At Home program or visit the Secretary of State’s Web site at
www.ss.ca.gov.

Voter Bill of Rights | 191

Secretary of State
1500 11th Street
Sacramento, CA 95814

PRSRT STD
U.S. POSTAGE
PAID
SECRETARY OF
STATE

GENERAL ELECTION
Official Voter Information Guide
Remember to Vote!
Tuesday, November 7, 2006
Polls are open from 7 a.m. to 8 p.m.

For additional copies of the Voter Information Guide
in any of the following languages, please call:
English: 1-800-345-VOTE (8683)
Español/Spanish: 1-800-232-VOTA (8682)
/Japanese: 1-800-339-2865
/Vietnamese: 1-800-339-8163

October 9
First day to apply for an absentee ballot by mail.

Tagalog/Tagalog: 1-800-339-2957
/Chinese: 1-800-339-2857

October 23
Last day to register to vote.

/Korean: 1-866-575-1558
TDD: 1-800-833-8683

October 31

In an effort to reduce election costs, the State Legislature has

Last day that county elections officials will accept
any voter’s application for an absentee ballot.

authorized the State and counties to mail only one guide to
addresses where more than one voter with the same surname

November 7
Last day to apply for an absentee ballot in person
at the office of the county elections official.

resides. You may obtain additional copies by contacting your
county elections official or by calling 1-800-345-VOTE.

w w w.vo t er g uide. s s .c a . g ov

