CITY OF SANTA CLARITA
DRAFT SAFETY ELEMENT




       DECEMBER 2021




                       RPC (4)(a)(ii)
     Safety                                                            City of Santa Clarita General Plan


     PART 1: BACKGROUND AND SAFETY ISSUES



A.   Purpose and Intent of the Safety Element

     Local governments are charged with the responsibility of protecting their citizens from unsafe
     conditions, including natural and man-made hazards that could affect life or health, property
     values, economic or social welfare, and/or environmental quality. The Safety Element describes
     natural and man-made hazards that may affect existing and future residents and provides
     guidelines for protecting public health and safety. It identifies present conditions and public
     concerns, and establishes policies and standards designed to minimize risks from hazards to
     acceptable levels. In addition, the Safety Element informs citizens about hazardous conditions in
     specific areas and assists policy makers in making land use and development decisions.

     Although some degree of risk is inevitable because disasters cannot be predicted with certainty,
     unsafe conditions may be minimized through development of plans and policies to limit the
     public’s exposure to hazards. For those cases in which disasters cannot be avoided, the Safety
     Element addresses emergency response services, and includes policies intended to minimize
     disruption and expedite recovery following disasters.



B.   Background

     Section 65302 of the California Government Code requires that the Safety Element address risks
     associated with ground rupture and shaking, seiche and dam failure, slope and soil instability,
     flooding, urban and wildland fires, evacuation routes, climate change, and any locally-identified
     issues, such as crime reduction, emergency preparedness, and hazardous materials incidents.
     The aim of the Safety Element is to reduce the potential risk of death, injuries, property damage,
     and economic and social dislocation resulting from these hazards, by providing a framework to
     guide local land use decisions related to zoning, subdivisions, and entitlement permits.

     Many of the issues covered in the Safety Element are also addressed in other General Plan
     elements. The Safety Element is consistent with the Land Use Element and Economic
     Development Element because hazards were identified and considered when establishing
     appropriate land use patterns on the Land Use Map, in order to limit public exposure to risk. The
     Element is consistent with the Circulation Element because circulation policies require adequate
     evacuation routes and emergency access throughout the community. The Element is consistent
     with the Housing Element because residential areas have been designated and are required to
     be designed to protect neighborhoods from hazardous conditions. The Element is consistent with
     the Conservation and Open Space Element because areas identified as potentially subject to
     flooding, slope failure, seiche, or other hazard, have been designated as Open Space. In addition,
     conservation policies to protect watersheds and hillsides are also intended to limit risk from
     flooding and slope failures. The Safety Element is consistent with the Noise Element because
     policies in both elements are intended to protect the public from unhealthful conditions.

     The Safety Element was updated in conjunction with the City’s 2021 Local Hazard Mitigation Plan
     (LHMP), and new hazard analysis in this Element is based on research done for the LHMP
     Additionally, this Safety Element incorporates the Santa Clarita Local Hazard Mitigation Plan by
     reference, as allowed by Government Code section 65302.6.



                                                    S-1
                                                                                           RPC (4)(a)(ii)
     Safety                                                               City of Santa Clarita General Plan


C.   Seismic and Geological Hazards

     Earthquakes and Fault Zones Affecting the Area

     The City contains and is in the vicinity of several known active and potentially active earthquake
     faults and fault zones. The term fault describes a fracture or zone of closely associated fractures
     where rocks on one side have been displaced with respect to those on the other side. A fault zone
     consists of a zone of related faults which may be braided or branching. New faults within the
     region continue to be discovered. Scientists have identified almost 100 faults in the Los Angeles
     area known to be capable of a magnitude 6.0 or greater earthquake. The January 17, 1994,
     magnitude 6.7 Northridge Earthquake, which produced severe ground motions causing 57 deaths
     and 9,253 injuries, left over 20,000 displaced from their homes. Scientists have indicated that
     such devastating shaking should be considered the norm near any large thrust fault earthquake
     in the region. Recent reports from the U.S. Geological Survey and the Southern California
     Earthquake Center conclude that the Los Angeles area could expect one earthquake every year
     of magnitude 5.0 or more, for the foreseeable future.

     A major earthquake in or near the Santa Clarita Valley may cause deaths and casualties, property
     damage, fires, hazardous materials spills, and other hazards. The effects could be aggravated by
     aftershocks and the secondary effects of fire, chemical accidents, water contamination, and
     possible dam failures. The time of day and season of the year could affect the number of
     casualties and property damage sustained from a major seismic event. In addition to impacts on
     human safety and property damage, a major earthquake could cause socio-economic impacts on
     Valley residents and businesses through loss of employment, interruption of the distribution of
     goods and services, and reductions in the local tax base. Disruption of transportation,
     telecommunications, and computer systems could further impact financial services and local
     government. A catastrophic earthquake could exceed the response capability of the City and
     County, requiring disaster relief support from other local governmental and private organizations,
     and from the State and federal governments.

     Earthquakes are classified by their magnitude and by their intensity. The intensity of seismic
     ground shaking is a function of several factors, including the magnitude of the quake, distance
     from the epicenter, and local geologic conditions. The largest or maximum credible earthquake a
     fault is capable of generating is used for community planning purposes. Earthquakes are typically
     defined by their magnitude as measured on the Richter Scale. Each whole number step in
     magnitude on the scale represents a tenfold increase in the amplitude of the waves on a
     seismogram, and about a 31-fold increase in energy released. For example, a 7.5-magnitude
     earthquake is 31 times more powerful than a 6.5-magnitude quake. The Modified Mercalli
     Intensity Scale is a measure of the damage potential of earthquakes and contains 12 levels of
     intensity from I (tremor not felt) to XII (damage nearly total). For purposes of the discussion in this
     section, intensity is given using the Richter Scale, which is generally described in Table S-1.

                           Table S-1: Richter Scale of Magnitude for Earthquakes

      Richter Magnitude        Earthquake Effects

          Less than 3.5        Generally not felt, but recorded

              3.5-5.4          Often felt, but rarely causes damage




                                                      S-2
                                                                                              RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                                  City of Santa Clarita General Plan


                            Slight damage to well-designed buildings, can cause major damage to
           5.5-6.0
                            poorly constructed buildings over small regions
                            Can be destructive in areas up to about 100 kilometers across, in
           6.1-6.9
                            areas where people live
           7.0-7.9          Major earthquake; can cause serious damage over large areas
                            Great earthquake; can cause serious damage in areas several
         8 or greater
                            hundred kilometers across


Active faults are those that have caused soil and strata displacement within the last 11,000 years
(the Holocene epoch). Potentially active faults show evidence of surface displacement during the
last two million years (the Quaternary period). Exhibit S-1 shows the general location of faults
which have experienced seismic activity within the last two million years and are considered to be
active or potentially active, and which are located within or in the vicinity of the City. Faults capable
of causing major damage within the area are listed below, with estimated potential magnitude
indicated on the Richter scale.

    •     The San Andreas Fault Zone extends approximately 1,200 kilometers from the Gulf of
          California north to the Cape of Mendocino, where it continues northward along the ocean
          floor. The San Andreas Fault Zone marks the boundary between the Pacific and North
          American geotechnical plates; it is a right-lateral strike-slip fault that occurs along the line
          of contact between the two plates. The Fault Zone is located north of the City of Santa
          Clarita and extends through the communities of Frazier Park, Palmdale, Wrightwood, and
          San Bernardino. In 1857, a magnitude 8.0 earthquake occurred along a 255-mile long
          segment of this Fault, between Cholame and San Bernardino. This seismic event is the
          most significant historic earthquake in Southern California history. The length of the San
          Andreas Fault Zone and its active seismic history indicate that it has a high potential for
          large-scale movement in the near future, with an estimated Richter magnitude of 6.8 - 8.0.
          Along the Mojave segment, closest to the Santa Clarita Valley, the interval period between
          major ruptures is estimated to be 140 years.

    •     The San Fernando Fault Zone is a thrust fault, 17 kilometers long, generally located
          approximately 20 miles southeast of Santa Clarita near the communities of San Fernando
          and Sunland. The Fault Zone's last major movement occurred on February 9, 1971,
          producing a quake with a Richter magnitude of 6.6 known as the San Fernando
          earthquake. The ground surface ruptures during this earthquake occurred on a little­
          known pre-existing fault in an area of low seismicity and previously unknown historic
          ground placement. The zone of displacement was approximately 12 miles long and had a
          maximum of three feet of vertical movement. The estimated interval between major
          ruptures along the San Fernando fault zone is estimated between 100 and 300 years, with
          a probable earthquake magnitude of 6.0 - 6.8.

    •     The San Gabriel Fault Zone traverses the area from northwest to southeast, extending
          140 kilometers from the community of Frazier Park (west of Gorman) to Mount Baldy in
          San Bernardino County. Within the Santa Clarita Valley, the San Gabriel Fault Zone
          underlies the northerly portion of the community from Castaic and Saugus, extending east
          through Canyon Country to Sunland. Holocene activity along the Fault Zone has occurred
          in the segment between Saugus and Castaic. The length of this Fault, and its relationship
          with the San Andreas Fault system, contribute to its potential for future activity. The interval



                                                    S-3
                                                                                            RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                               City of Santa Clarita General Plan


         between major ruptures is unknown, although the western half is thought to be more active
         than the eastern portion. The Fault is a right­ lateral strike-slip fault with an estimated
         earthquake magnitude of 7.2.

   •     The Holser Fault is approximately 20 kilometers in length extending from east of former
         Highway 99, westward to the vicinity of Piru Creek. Nearby communities include Castaic,
         Val Verde, and Piru. The surface trace of the Fault intersects the San Gabriel Fault east
         of Saugus. The most recent surface rupture has been identified as Quaternary period.
         Subsurface data in nearby oil fields demonstrate that the Holser Fault is a southward
         dipping, sharply-folded reverse fault. Subsurface exposures of this Fault in the
         Metropolitan Water District’s Saugus Tunnel show at least 14 feet of terrace deposits
         offset by this Fault, which suggest that the Fault is potentially active. This Fault could
         generate a maximum estimated earthquake magnitude of 6.5.

   •     The Sierra Madre Fault is a 55-kilometer long fault zone generally located southeast of
         the City along the north side of the San Gabriel Mountains, extending from Sunland to
         Glendora. The Sierra Madre Fault is a reverse fault that dips to the north. The zone of
         faulting is similar to, and may lie within, the same fault system as the San Fernando Fault
         Zone, which moved in 1971. Movement along faults in this zone has resulted in the uplift
         of the San Gabriel Mountains. Geologic evidence indicates that the Sierra Madre Fault
         Zone has been active in the Holocene epoch. The interval between major ruptures is
         estimated at several thousand years, and the Fault Zone has an estimated earthquake
         magnitude of 6.0 - 7.0.

   •     The Santa Susana Fault is a thrust fault, dipping to the north. The Fault is located south
         of the intersection of Interstate 5 and State Route 14 and extends 38 kilometers from Simi
         Valley to the San Fernando Valley. Nearby communities include Sylmar and San
         Fernando. This Fault has been classified as potentially active by geologists based on
         evidence suggesting that movement has occurred within the past two million years
         (Quaternary period). In its western portions, there is evidence that the fault plane has been
         folded and would, therefore, probably not have renewed movement. The interval between
         major ruptures is unknown. Portions of the Fault Zone have an estimated earthquake
         magnitude of 6.5 - 7.3.

   •     The Oak Ridge Fault is a thrust fault extending 90 kilometers. The Fault is located west of
         the City and parallels the Santa Clara River and State Route 126 from Piru to the coast.
         Movement along the portion of the fault between Santa Paula and Ventura has been
         identified in the Holocene period. At its eastern end, the Oak Ridge thrust becomes more
         difficult to trace and appears to be overthrust by the Santa Susana Fault. The magnitude
         6.7 Northridge earthquake in 1994 is thought to have occurred along the eastern edge of
         the Oak Ridge Fault. The interval between major ruptures is unknown, and the maximum
         earthquake magnitude is estimated to be 6.5 - 7.5.

   •     The Clearwater Fault is an east/west trending reverse fault, approximately 32 kilometers
         in length. The Fault is located approximately 10 miles northeast of the Castaic community
         and runs through Lake Hughes and Leona Valley, where it merges with the San Andreas
         Fault Zone. Evidence of movement along this Fault has been identified in the Late
         Quaternary period. Although an estimate of the amount and type of displacement on the
         Clearwater Fault is difficult to determine, the Fault is considered to be potentially active.

   •     The Soledad Fault is a left-lateral normal fault 20 kilometers in length, located near the


                                                 S-4
                                                                                         RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                                 City of Santa Clarita General Plan


         communities of Acton and Soledad Canyon. The Fault is considered to be active, with
         surface rupture during the Quaternary period.

   •     The Northridge Hills Fault crosses the San Fernando Valley through Northridge and
         Chatsworth, disappearing under thick alluvium in the east central valley. This Fault is
         believed either to be more than one fault plane or a splinter of faults that align and possibly
         blend with the fault complex in the Santa Susanna Pass, which extends west into Simi
         Valley. Near Northridge in the San Fernando Valley, the Northridge Hills Fault is buried
         beneath the alluvium, and the Fault's location is interpreted from oil industry data and from
         topographic patterns. The Fault is a reverse fault, 25 kilometers in length. This portion of
         the Fault has had movement during the late Quaternary period. Despite its name, it is not
         the fault responsible for the Northridge Earthquake (which occurred along the Oak Ridge
         Fault).

   •     The San Francisquito Fault is a subsidiary fault of the San Andreas Fault Zone. Although
         there is no evidence of recent activity, it has experienced up to seven meters of vertical
         displacement in the past. Originating just north of the Bouquet Reservoir, it extends under
         the dam and travels southwest to San Francisquito Canyon.

   •     The Pelona Fault, seven kilometers in length, is located near the community of Sleepy
         Valley and has ruptured in the Late Quaternary period.

In addition to seismic impacts from these faults, there is a potential for ground shaking from blind
thrust faults, which are low angle detachment faults that do not reach the ground surface. Recent
examples of blind thrust fault earthquakes include the 1994 Northridge (magnitude 6.7), 1983
Coalinga (magnitude 6.5), and 1987 Whittier Narrows (magnitude 5.9) events. Much of the Los
Angeles area is underlain by blind thrust faults, typically at a depth of six to 10 miles below ground
surface. These faults have the capacity to produce earthquakes of a magnitude up to 7.5.

The Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act, adopted by the State of California in 1972,
requires identification of known fault hazard areas on a map and prohibits construction of specified
building types within these fault hazard areas. The primary purpose of the Act is to prevent the
construction of buildings used for human occupancy on the surface trace of active faults. Pursuant
to this law, the State Geologist has established Special Studies Zones around active faults, as
depicted on maps distributed to all cities and counties. Local agencies are required to regulate
development within these Special Studies Zones and may be more restrictive than the State law
based upon local conditions. Generally, the Act requires that structures for human occupancy
must be set back 50 feet from the fault trace. Areas within the Santa Clarita Valley that are
designated as Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zones are shown in Figure S-1.

The area has experienced shaking from several earthquakes recorded back to 1855, as listed on
Table S-2. Prior to that date the historic record is incomplete. Epicenters of historic earthquakes
affecting the planning area are shown on Figure S-2. One of the largest occurred in 1857 in the
area of Fort Tejon. Estimated at a magnitude of 8.0, this earthquake resulted in a surface rupture
scar of about 220 miles in length along the San Andreas Fault, and shaking was reported from
Los Angeles to San Francisco.




                                                  S-5
                                                                                           RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                             City of Santa Clarita General Plan


                      Figure S-1: Alquist Priolo Fault Special Study Zones




                               Source: City of Santa Clarita, 2021

The strongest recent seismic event was the January 1994 Northridge earthquake. The earthquake
epicenter was located approximately 13 miles southwest of the Santa Clarita Valley in the
Northridge community of Los Angeles County. Estimated damages from the quake included $650
million to residential structures, $41 million to businesses, and over $20 million to public
infrastructure. Although no deaths were recorded in the Santa Clarita Valley from the earthquake,
the event resulted in damage to water distribution and filtration systems, natural gas service,
electrical service, and roads throughout the area. Damage included the collapse of a freeway
bridge at the Interstate 5/State Route 14 interchange, resulting in traffic and circulation impacts
to the area for an extended period of time. Other damage included a crude oil release from a
pipeline rupture and the dislocation of many mobile homes from their foundations. The City,
County, and many other agencies cooperated in disaster recovery efforts, quickly re-establishing
essential services, and rebuilding critical facilities.




                                               S-6
                                                                                       RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                         City of Santa Clarita General Plan


                       Figure S-2: Regional Earthquake History




                                    Source: USGS

          Table S-2: Historic Earthquakes Affecting the Santa Clarita Valley

         Year                      Location                     Richter Magnitude
         1855          Los Angeles, Los Angeles County                Est. 6.0
         1857              Fort Tejon, Kern County                    Est. 8.0
         1883            Ventura-Kern County border                   Est. 6.0
         1893      San Fernando Valley, Los Angeles County         Est. 5.5 - 5.9
         1916              Near Lebec, Kern County                      5.2
         1925    Santa Barbara Channel, Santa Barbara County            6.3
         1933         Huntington Beach, Orange County                   6.3
         1941    Santa Barbara Channel, Santa Barbara County            5.9
         1946             Northeastern Kern County                      6.3
         1947           Central San Bernardino County                   6.2
         1948      Near Desert Hot Springs, Riverside County            6.5



                                          S-7
                                                                                   RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                                City of Santa Clarita General Plan


             1952              White Wolf Fault, Kern County                    7.5
             1971       San Fernando (Sylmar), Los Angeles County               6.7
             1987          Whittier Narrows, Los Angeles County                 5.9
             1988              Pasadena, Los Angeles County                     5.0
             1991            Sierra Madre, Los Angeles County                   5.8
             1994             Northridge, Los Angeles County                    6.7
             1999          Hector Mine, San Bernardino County                   7.1
             2010      El Mayor-Cucapah Earthquake, Baja California             7.2
             2019          Ridgecrest Earthquake, Kern County                   7.1

Impacts of Earthquakes

Ground shaking is the most significant earthquake action in terms of potential structural damage
and loss of life. Ground shaking is the movement of the earth's surface in response to a seismic
event. The intensity of the ground shaking, and the resultant damages are determined by the
magnitude of the earthquake, distance from the epicenter, and characteristics of surface geology.
This hazard is the primary cause of collapsed buildings and other structures. The significance of
an earthquake's ground shaking action is directly related to the density and type of buildings and
the number of people exposed to its effect.

Surface rupture or displacement is the break in the ground's surface and associated deformation
resulting from the movement of a fault./ Surface rupture occurs along the fault trace, where the
fault breaks the ground surface during a seismic event. Buildings constructed on or adjacent to a
fault trace are typically severely damaged from fault rupture in the event of a major fault
displacement during an earthquake. As this hazard cannot be prevented, known faults are
identified and mapped so as to prevent or restrict new construction of structures within fault hazard
areas.

Liquefaction refers to a process by which water-saturated granular soils transform from a solid to
a liquid state during strong ground shaking. Liquefaction usually occurs during or shortly after a
large earthquake. The movement of saturated soils during seismic events from ground shaking
can result in soil instability and possible structural damage. In effect, the liquefaction soil strata
behave as a heavy fluid. Buried tanks may float to the surface, and structures above the
liquefaction strata may sink. Pipelines passing through liquefaction materials typically sustain a
relatively large number of breaks in an earthquake.

Liquefaction has been observed to occur in soft, poorly graded granular materials (such as loose
sands) where the water table is high. Areas in the Santa Clarita Valley underlain by
unconsolidated alluvium, such as along the Santa Clara River and tributary washes, may be prone
to liquefaction.

Dam inundation is another potential hazard from seismic shaking. Within the Santa Clarita Valley,
dams are located at the Castaic Reservoir and the Bouquet Reservoir. If the Castaic Reservoir
Dam were to rupture from a seismic event, potential flooding could occur in Castaic, Val Verde,
and Valencia. Failure of the two dams at the Bouquet Reservoir could result in flooding
downstream in Saugus and Valencia. These potential flood hazards are further discussed in
Section D (Flood Hazards).

A seiche is an earthquake-produced wave in a lake or reservoir. Seiches can be triggered by


                                                 S-8
                                                                                          RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                              City of Santa Clarita General Plan


ground motion from distant earthquakes or from ground displacement beneath the water body. In
reservoirs, seiches can generate short-term flooding of downstream areas. Within the region, the
Bouquet and Castaic Reservoirs may be subject to seiches due to earthquake activity.

In addition to these impacts, a City emergency plan has identified the following potential damage
to vital public services, systems, and facilities which may result from a catastrophic earthquake:

   •     Bed loss in hospitals;
   •     Disruption or interruption of communications systems;
   •     Damage to flood control channels and pumping stations;
   •     Damage to power plants and interruption of the power grid;
   •     Fires due to downed power lines and broken gas lines, exacerbated by loss of water
         pressure and potential damage to fire stations and equipment;
   •     Damage to freeway systems and bridges, and blocking of surface streets;
   •     Damage to natural gas facilities, including major transmission lines and individual service
         connections;
   •     Petroleum pipeline breakage and fuel spills;
   •     Interruption of rail service due to possible bridge and track damage;
   •     Interruption of sanitary sewage treatment; and
   •     Interruption of water import through the State Water Project system.

Emergency response and recovery from seismic hazards is dependent on multiple factors,
including the nature and severity of the hazard, infrastructure affected, population affected, and
any accompanying hazards such as fire or utility failure. Development standards within Santa
Clarita’s Unified Development Code (UDC) requires sufficient peak water supply, road widths,
structure clearance, and implements seismic design codes as conditions of development in order
to ensure adequate emergency response and to minimize risk.

Seismic Design Requirements

In order to limit structural damage from earthquakes, seismic design codes have undergone
substantial revision in recent years. Earthquake safety standards for new construction became
widely adopted in local building codes in Southern California following the 1933 Long Beach
Earthquake and have been updated in various versions of the California Building Code since that
date. The 1994 Northridge Earthquake resulted in significant changes to building codes to ensure
that buildings are designed and constructed to resist the lateral force of an earthquake and
repeated aftershocks. Required construction techniques to ensure building stability include
adequate nailing, anchorage, foundation, shear walls, and welds for steel-frame buildings.

Both the City and County enforce structural requirements of the Building Code. The Alquist­ Priolo
Special Studies Zones (shown in Figure S-1), along with sound engineering and geotechnical
practices are instrumental in evaluating the structural stability of proposed new development.
Policies in the Safety Element are included to ensure that proposals for new development in the
City are reviewed to ensure protection of lives and property from seismic hazards, through
analysis of existing conditions and requirements for safe building practices.




                                                S-9
                                                                                        RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                             City of Santa Clarita General Plan


                                  Figure S-3: Seismic Hazards




                            Source: California Geologic Survey 2021

Landslides

Landslides occur when the underlying geological support on a hillside can no longer maintain the
load of material above it, causing a slope failure. The term landslide also commonly refers to a
falling, sliding, or flowing mass of soil, rocks, water, and debris which may include mudslides and
debris flows. Landslides generated by the El Nino storms of 1998 and 1992 illustrate the hazards


                                               S-10
                                                                                       RPC (4)(a)(ii)
     Safety                                                                City of Santa Clarita General Plan


     to life and property posed by debris flows and landslides. The size of a landslide can vary from
     minor rock falls to large hillside slumps. Deep-seated landslides are caused by the infiltration of
     water from rain or other origin into unstable material. Fast-moving debris flows are triggered by
     intense rains that over-saturate pockets of soil on hillsides. Landslides may result from either
     natural conditions or human activity. They are often associated with earthquakes although there
     are other factors that may influence their occurrence, including improper grading, soil moisture
     and composition, and subsurface geology. Soils with high clay content or located on shale are
     susceptible to landslides, especially when saturated from heavy rains or excessive landscape
     irrigation. Much of the area consists of mountainous or hilly terrain, where conditions for unstable
     soils and landslides may be present.

     The California Division of Mines and Geology has prepared Seismic Hazard Zone Maps of the
     Newhall, Mint Canyon, Oat Mountain, and San Fernando 7.5-minute quadrangles. These four
     quadrangles include land within the City limits. The maps identify areas of liquefaction hazard and
     earthquake-induced landslide hazard. Exhibit S-3 shows areas prone to earthquake­ induced
     landslides and liquefaction, based on these maps.

     Generally, Valley areas near rivers and floodplains are prone to earthquake-induced liquefaction,
     and hillsides are prone to earthquake-induced landslides. Large parts of the City are subject to
     these hazards, which are mitigated through seismic design requirements and the Unified
     Development Code.

     Subsidence

     Subsidence is the gradual, local settling or sinking of the earth's surface with little or no horizontal
     motion. Subsidence usually occurs as a result of the extraction of subsurface gas, oil, or water,
     or from hydro-compaction. It is not the result of a landslide or slope failure. Subsidence typically
     occurs over a long period of time and can result in structural impacts in developed areas, such as
     cracked pavement and building foundations, and dislocated wells, pipelines, and water drains. No
     large-scale problems with ground subsidence have been reported in the City.

     Both the City and the County have adopted ordinances requiring soil and geotechnical
     investigations for grading or new construction in areas with a potential for landslide or subsidence
     activity, in order to mitigate potential hazards from soil instability.



D.   Flood Hazards

     Surface Water Drainage Patterns

     The term flooding refers to a rise in the level of a body of water or the rapid accumulation of runoff
     resulting in the temporary inundation of land that is usually dry. Flooding can be caused by rivers
     and streams overflowing their banks due to heavy rains. Flood hazards in the area are related to
     rainfall intensity and duration, regional topography, type and extent of vegetation cover, amount
     of impermeable surface, and available drainage facilities.

     The size, or magnitude, of a flood is described by a term called a "recurrence interval." By studying
     a long period of flow records for a stream, hydrologists estimate the size of a flood that would
     have a likelihood of occurring during various intervals. For example, a five-year flood event would
     occur, on the average, once every five years (and would have a 20 percent chance of occurring



                                                      S-11
                                                                                               RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                          City of Santa Clarita General Plan


in any one year). Although a 100-year flood event is expected to happen only once in a century,
there is a one percent chance that a flood of that size could happen during any year. The
magnitude of flood events could be altered if changes are made to a drainage basin, such as by
diversion of flow or increased flows generated by additional impervious surface area.

The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has mapped most of the flood risk areas
within the United States as part of the National Flood Insurance Program. Most communities with
a one percent chance of a flood occurring in any given year have the floodplains depicted on a
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). Figure S-4 depicts the 100-year flood event boundaries for
the major watercourses in the area, which are generally located within and directly adjacent to
the Santa Clara River and its tributaries.

              Figure S-4: Special Flood Hazard Areas and Dam Inundation Areas




                                  Source: FEMA, OES 2021


                                             S-12
                                                                                    RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                             City of Santa Clarita General Plan


The Santa Clarita Valley contains many natural streams and creeks that function as storm drain
channels, conveying surface water runoff into the Santa Clara River. From its headwaters in the
San Gabriel Mountains to its mouth at the Pacific Ocean, the Santa Clara River drains a
watershed of 1,643 square miles, approximately 80 miles in length and about 25 miles in width.
Ninety percent of the watershed consists of mountainous terrain; the remaining portion is a mix
of valley floor, floodplain, and coastal plain. Within the headwater areas of the Santa Clarita
Valley, discharge during rainfall events tends to be rapid due to the steep terrain. High intensity
rainfalls, in combination with alluvial soils, sparse vegetation, erosion, and steep gradients, can
result in significant debris-laden flash floods.

The Santa Clara River and its tributary streams play a major part in moving the large volume of
runoff that is generated from the Valley and surrounding foothills and mountains. The drainage
system, including natural streams as well as constructed storm drain infrastructure within City and
County areas, is adequate to handle normal precipitation in the region (15-19 inches per year).
With the rapid urbanization of the Valley since 1960, stormwater volumes have increased due to
increased impervious surface area from parking lots, rooftops, and streets. Flood control facilities
have been constructed to mitigate the impacts of development on drainage patterns, including
flood control channels, debris basins, and runoff control systems. Throughout the City, streams
have been channelized into soft bottom channels with concrete sides to allow for development in
the floodplain of the Santa Clara River.

Because the channelization of stormwater can increase velocity and flows, much of the Santa
Clara River has remained unchannelized and in a natural condition. Where flood control
improvements have been required, the City has used buried bank stabilization as the preferred
method of protecting adjacent development from flood hazards. Buried bank stabilization has
been used along various reaches of the Santa Clara River, the South Fork of the Santa Clara
River, and San Francisquito Creek. Stabilizing banks from erosion by use of buried reinforcement
structures provides opportunities to maintain stormwater flows while protecting habitat along the
riverbanks, providing aesthetic views of the watercourse, and creating opportunities to integrate
channel improvements with trail systems.

Flood Protection

Agencies responsible for flood protection include the Los Angeles County Flood Control District
(LAFCD) and the Los Angeles County Department of Public Works. The LAFCD has constructed
major flood control facilities in the area, including the concrete-lined portions of the Santa Clara
River and its tributaries. The Los Angeles County Department of Public Works operates and
maintains major drainage channels, storm drains, sediment basins, and streambed stabilization
structures. Both the City and County are responsible for maintaining surface water quality through
street sweeping, catch basin clearing, public education, and other measures required by the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permits issued by the Regional Water
Quality Control Board.

As described in the Conservation and Open Space Element, both the City and County have acted
to protect the Santa Clara River floodplain from development in order to maintain the river's
natural character and to protect future development from flood hazards. The City's 1996 Santa
Clara River Enhancement and Management Plan recommended an acquisition program for land
adjacent to the river for open space, recreational, and flood protection uses, and the City has
since acquired hundreds of acres of land along the river for these purposes. Within the County's
adopted Newhall Ranch Specific Plan, land adjacent to the River was set aside for open space,
floodplain, and habitat protection; flood protection in this area will be achieved through bank


                                               S-13
                                                                                       RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                                 City of Santa Clarita General Plan


stabilization, detention basins combined with habitat areas, rip rap, and soft­ bottom channels
designed to appear natural.

                      Figure S-5: Critical Facilities and Flood Hazard Areas 1




                          Source: FEMA, OES, City of Santa Clarita, 2021

Localized flooding has been experienced intermittently in some areas of the Valley due to local
drainage conditions. During heavy rains over the last few years some areas of Newhall, , Canyon


1
 City-Owned Critical Facilities are identified in the 2021 Local Hazard Mitigation Plan (LHMP) and by the
City of Santa Clarita


                                                 S-14
                                                                                           RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                              City of Santa Clarita General Plan


Country, Sand Canyon, and Bouquet Canyon have experienced mudflows or flooding. Local
flooding can be exacerbated by erosion and mudslides when heavy rains occur after wildfires.
Areas of the City known to experience intermittent flooding are portions of Sand Canyon and
Newhall Creek, as shown in Figure S-4. Areas in Santa Clarita subject to flooding hazards are
primarily residential, with some flood hazard areas affecting shopping centers and educational
facilities. Old Town Newhall faces flood hazards affecting higher density commercial and retail
uses, as well as the Newhall Community Center, Newhall Metrolink Station, and Old Town
Newhall Library, identified as critical facilities (See Figure S-5). In addition, the Canyon Country
Community Center and Canyon Country Jo Anne Darcy Library face an elevated flood risk. The
most destructive flooding event in recent Santa Clarita history happened in January and February
of 2005, when flooding caused significant damage to a mobile home park and other residential
sites near Newhall Creek.

Most of the flood control facilities serving Santa Clarita are maintained by LA County Flood
Control. The City maintains a practice of transferring facilities to the County in conjunction with
approved development project. The City has no plans to construct any new major drainage facility
improvements. The current City system has adequate capacity to handle projected storm flows,
provided it is properly maintained. Significant development in areas subject to flooding, including
portions of Sierra Highway north of the Santa Clara River, will likely generate requirements for
flood control improvements in this area. Localized, short-term flooding from excessive rainfall, soil
erosion from wildland fires, or inadequate local drainage infrastructure will be addressed by
providing or requiring local improvements as needed.

As discussed in the Conservation and Open Space Element, one way to maximize use of existing
flood control and drainage facilities is to limit the use of impermeable surface area on development
sites. Design techniques available to increase infiltration and decrease runoff on development
sites include use of permeable paving materials, eliminating curbs that channel stormwater away
from natural or landscaped areas, use of green roofs, and allowing greater building height to limit
building footprints and maximize pervious site area. These and other similar techniques,
collectively known as Low Impact Development (LID), were designed to enhance water quality by
limiting soil erosion, sedimentation, and pollution from pavement into streams and rivers. LID
principles also reduce impacts to drainage and flood control systems from increased flows
generated by new development and provide for recharge of local groundwater aquifers. Although
flood protection devices and structures are necessary in some areas to preserve public safety,
they will be combined with other available methods of reducing flooding by promoting infiltration
of stormwater at the source through LID design principles.

Flood Control Regulations

Both the City and the County have adopted floodplain management ordinances to implement the
National Flood Insurance Program and other federal requirements established by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The City’s Floodplain Management Ordinance (Chapter 10.06
of the Municipal Code) was adopted in August 2008 and amended in May 2013. The Floodplain
Management Ordinance is based on the California Model Floodplain Management Ordinance
issued by the California Department of Water Resources who administers the National Floodplain
Insurance Program (NFIP) for FEMA. The City's Floodplain Management Ordinance establishes
floodway maps, governs land uses and construction of structures within floodplains, and
establishes water surface elevations. Floodplains are divided into two types of hazard areas: 1)
the "floodway" which is the portion of the stream channel that carries deep, fast-moving water
(usually defined as the area needed to contain a 100-year storm flow); and 2) the "flood fringe"
area, the remainder of the floodplain outside of the floodway, which is subject to inundation from


                                                S-15
                                                                                        RPC (4)(a)(ii)
     Safety                                                              City of Santa Clarita General Plan


     shallow, slow-moving water. Drainage requirements are also addressed in other portions of the
     Unified Development Code (UDC) and in the building code, in order to ensure that stormwater
     flows are directed away from buildings into drainage devices to prevent flooding.

     Dam Failure

     Dam failure can result from natural or man-made causes, including earthquakes, erosion,
     improper siting or design, rapidly-rising flood waters, or structural flaws. Dam failure may cause
     loss of life, damage to property, and displacement of persons residing in the inundation path.
     Damage to electric generating facilities and transmission lines could also impact life support
     systems in communities outside of the immediate inundation area. Within the Santa Clarita Valley,
     the two major reservoirs which could have a significant impact on the Santa Clarita Valley in the
     event of a dam failure are located in Bouquet Canyon and Castaic. These facilities, along with
     potential inundation areas, are shown on Figure S-4.

     The Bouquet Canyon Reservoir is located north of the City. The reservoir has two earth-filled
     dams, one on the west side overlooking Cherry Canyon, and one on the south side above Bouquet
     Canyon. Both reservoirs are owned and operated by the City of Los Angeles. The Bouquet
     Reservoir has a maximum capacity of 36,505 acre feet of water and 7.6 miles of shoreline.
     Because of its two dams, two potential inundation areas have been identified in the event of a
     dam failure. On the Cherry Canyon side, the water would flow west for approximately two miles
     through the Canyon into San Francisquito Canyon, and then south for approximately 11 miles into
     the Santa Clara River. The Bouquet Creek dam would drain south through Bouquet Canyon for
     17 miles, into the Santa Clara River.

     The Castaic Dam is located on Lake Hughes Road, one mile northeast of Interstate 5, just north
     of the community of Castaic. This dam is operated by the State of California Resources Agency,
     Department of Water Resources. Castaic Dam is an earth-filled dam located at the confluence of
     Castaic and Elizabeth Lake Creeks. The dam facing is approximately one mile across with a
     maximum capacity of 350,000 acre-feet of water, covering a surface area of 2,600 acres with 34
     miles of shoreline. Should a breach in the dam occur, the water will flow south in Castaic Creek
     for approximately five miles to the Santa Clara River.

     Failure of these dams during a catastrophic event, such as a severe earthquake, is considered
     unlikely, due to their type of construction. However, local safety plans have considered the
     possibility of dam failure and have outlined a procedure for response and recovery from this type
     of hazard, including identification of inundation areas and evacuation routes. An emergency
     response to dam failure or other severe flooding event typically includes multiple agencies from
     multiple jurisdictions, including the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department, Los Angeles County
     Fire Department, the Los Angeles County Flood Control District, California Department of
     Transportation, California Highway Patrol, and the County and State Office of Emergency
     Services. Other representatives and specialists that may be involved include those that work in
     public works, engineering, hydrology, geology, and swift water rescue. Emergency response
     protocol are detailed in the City’s Emergency Operations Plan (EOP).



E.   Fire Hazards

     This section identifies fire protection services and fire hazards within the City of Santa Clarita as
     well as mitigation measures to address these hazards.


                                                     S-16
                                                                                             RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                                City of Santa Clarita General Plan


Fire Protection Services

The City of Santa Clarita contracts with the Los Angeles County Fire Department (LACFD) for fire
services. The LACFD currently serves 60 cities and unincorporated communities. LACFD
provides urban and wildland fire protection services, fire prevention services, emergency medical
services, hazardous materials services, and urban search and rescue services throughout the
city.

The Santa Clarita Valley is currently served by 15 LACFD fire stations: 73, 76, 104, 107 108, 111,
123, 124, 126, 128, 132, 143, 149, 150, and 156. In 2020, the LACFD was staffed by 4,775
personnel and responded to 379,517 calls for service; 81% of these were medical emergencies.
The LACFD has additional resources available to provide back-up services to the City as needed,
including additional engine companies, truck companies, paramedic squads, hazardous material
squads, firefighting helicopters, other fire camps, and a variety of specialty equipment. The
LACFD has mutual and automatic aid agreements with surrounding jurisdictions.

                               Figure S-6: Public Safety Facilities




                              Source: LACFD, City of Santa Clarita



                                              S-17
                                                                                          RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                               City of Santa Clarita General Plan


Any additional development within the service area of LACFD, which includes all of Santa Clarita
and surrounding unincorporated portions of Los Angeles County, could lead to an increased strain
on existing Fire Department’s resources and service demands.

Based on projected needs, new fire stations have been constructed recently within Santa Clarita
and the surrounding area, including Station #156 on Copper Hill Drive, #132 on Sand Canyon
Road, and #104 on Golden Valley Road. As of September 2021, there were 15 fire stations that
currently serve the City of Santa Clarita. Additional stations outside the area are also able to
provide support as needed and will continue to do so. Los Angeles County Fire Department has
a five-year Master Fire Station Plan that is updated annually and is used for the planning of fire
stations in high-growth urban expansion areas including the Santa Clarita Valley.

The County has adopted fire impact fees to fund construction of new fire stations and the purchase
of fire equipment. These fees are collected from developers who are required to mitigate potential
health and safety impacts from fire danger by funding construction of a new fire station or
purchase of equipment.

Los Angeles County is a known as a “contract county” which means LACFD maintains a contract
with the State of California to provide wildland fire protection on State Responsibility Areas (SRA).
The Department has the responsibility as a contract county to implement the Strategic Fire Plan
for California in Los Angeles County. The Los Angeles County Fire Department operates as a unit
of the CAL FIRE and is responsible for all Strategic Fire Plan activities within the County. The
LACFD has prepared a Strategic Fire Plan to address three primary topics: emergency
operations, public service, and organizational effectiveness.

The purpose of the Strategic Fire Plan is to describe preparedness and firefighting capabilities,
identify collaboration with all stakeholders, identify values at risk, and discuss and prioritize pre-
fire and post-fire management strategies and tactics. The plan is intended for use as a planning
and assessment tool and is meant to reduce the loss of values at risk within the County of Los
Angeles.

As part of the Consolidated Fire Protection District, the City receives urban and wildland fire
protection services from the LACFD. Mutual aid agreements are maintained with the Angeles
National Forest, Kern County, Ventura County, and Los Angeles City Fire Departments. LACFD
also provides fire prevention services, emergency medical services, hazardous materials
services, and urban search and rescue services.

Some fire stations in the Valley are geared toward providing urban fire protection services, while
others in outlying areas respond to brush fires along the urban-wildland interface. According to
Los Angeles County Fire Chief Daryl L. Osby “Our response efforts also take community action
and cooperation; preparation and prevention go hand-in-hand”.

Fire Prevention Activities

In addition to suppression activities, the Fire Department has adopted programs directed at
wildland fire prevention, including adoption of the State Fire Code standards for new development
in hazardous fire areas. The Fire Prevention Division of Los Angeles County Fire Department is
responsible for reviewing development site plans and site construction, occupancy inspections,
defensible space inspections, investigating hazard complaints, hazardous materials coordination,
and wildfire mitigation.




                                                S-18
                                                                                         RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                             City of Santa Clarita General Plan


Fire prevention activities are headed by the County Fire Marshall, and include preparation of
codes, ordinances, and standards; plan checking for fire safety, sprinkler systems and fire alarms;
fire inspections of structures; brush clearance compliance programs; fuel modification; education;
fire investigation; establishing standards for access and fire flow in new subdivisions; and
environmental review, among other activities.

Fire prevention requirements for development include provision of access roads, adequate road
width, and clearance of brush around structures located in hillside areas. Every building
constructed must be accessible with access roads no less than 20 feet wide, and access width
requirements may be increased based on the type of development. In addition, proof of adequate
water supply for fire flow is required within a designated distance for new construction in fire
hazard areas. The peak load water supply is the supply of water available to meet both domestic
water and firefighting needs during the particular season and time of day when domestic water
demand on a water system is at its peak. Both the City and the County review new development
plans to ensure that adequate water supply is available to provide fire flow as well as daily water
supply prior to issuance of building permits. The City of Santa Clarita is served by the Santa
Clarita Valley Water Agency (SCV Water). SCV Water is made up of three interconnected water
distribution systems: Newhall Water Division (NWD), Santa Clarita Water Division (SCWD) and
Valencia Water Division (VWD). SCV Water plans for long-term availability of water resources
through an Urban Water Management Plan, Water Shortage Contingency Plan, and a Water Use
Efficiency Strategic Plan.

The City of Santa Clarita contains areas designated by CAL FIRE as a Very High Fire Hazard
Severity Zone (VHFHSZ). Due to the high fire hazard potential that exists in a VHFHSZ,
development within these areas is subject to various governmental codes, guidelines, and
programs that are aimed at reducing the wildfire risk potential and to ensure public and fire
responder safety. The County of Los Angeles has prepared fuel modification guidelines and
landscape criteria for all new construction to implement relating to fuel modification planning and
to help reduce the threat of fires in high hazard areas.

Along with the policies included in the General Plan, the City has adopted the 2019 California
Building Code and Fire Code within the municipal code along with the Los Angeles County Fire
Department Fire Code. The adopted fire and building codes discuss home hardening, setback
requirements as well as defensible space and vegetation fuel modification in accordance with
state standards within VHFHSZs.

Wildland Fire

Wildland fire refers to a fire that occurs in a suburban or rural area that contains uncultivated
lands, timber, range, watershed, brush, or grasslands, including areas in which there is a
mingling of developed and undeveloped lands. For thousands of years, fires have been a
natural part of the Southern California ecosystem. However, as urban development has
spread throughout hillside areas of the region, wildland fires have come to represent a
significant hazard to life and property.

The classic "wildland/urban interface" exists where well-defined urban and suburban
development presses up against open expanses of wildland areas. Certain conditions must
be present for significant interface fires to occur, including hot, dry, windy weather; the
inability of fire protection forces to contain or suppress the fire; the occurrence of multiple
fires that overwhelm committed resources; and a large fuel load (dense vegetation). Once
such a fire has started, several conditions influence its behavior, including fuel load,


                                               S-19
                                                                                       RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                                   City of Santa Clarita General Plan


topography, weather, drought, and development patterns. Southern California has two
distinct areas of risk for wildland fires: 1) the foothills and lower mountain areas, typically
covered with scrub brush or chaparral; and 2) the higher elevations of mountains, covered
with heavily forested terrain.

Fire danger rises based on the age and amount of vegetation; therefore, fire incidents tend
to be cyclical in an area as vegetation intensity increases with age, and dead vegetation
accumulates. Large fires may also happen more frequently due to climate change, as
discussed in Section L.

Weather forecasts for July-October 2020 predicted elevated potential for fire weather
conditions, including above normal temperatures and Santa Ana winds. The 2020 fire season
in California, referred to as the ‘2020 Fire Siege’ was the largest and one of the most
destructive wildfire seasons in the state’s history 2. The 2020 Fire Siege claimed the lives of
28 civilians and three firefighters, destroyed 9,248 structures and consumed 4.2 million acres.
The siege affected multiple jurisdictions throughout California.

The magnitude and extent of smoke impacts from the 2020 wildfire season are
unprecedented in California. The simultaneous occurrence of several large wildfires across
the State created widespread, long-lasting smoke impacts to many Californians, regardless
of the prevailing wind direction. Maximum fine particle levels persisted in the “hazardous”
range of the Air Quality Index (AQI) for weeks in several areas of the State. The cumulative
impact of the long-duration smoke exposure on public health was a compounding threat to
the COVID-19 pandemic.

At the height of the 2020 Fire Siege, approximately 18,500 firefighters were engaged in
firefighting operations. The impact to the residents of California was extreme from a variety
of aspects. Evacuations were initiated in multiple communities, cities, and counties
simultaneously. The 2020 Fire Siege burned more acres in California than at any other time
in recorded history.

Wildland fires can require evacuation of portions of the population, revised traffic patterns to
accommodate emergency response vehicle operations, and restrictions on water usage
during the emergency. Health hazards may exist for elderly or disabled persons who cannot
evacuate or succumb to smoke and heat. The loss of utilities, and increased demand on
medical services, should also be anticipated.

The Santa Clarita Valley is susceptible to wildland fires because of its hilly terrain, dry
weather conditions, and native vegetation. Steep slopes allow for the quick spread of flames
during fires and pose difficulty for fire suppression due to access problems for firefighting
equipment. Late summer and fall months are critical times of the year when the Santa Ana
winds deliver hot, dry desert air into the region. Highly flammable plant communities
consisting of variable mixtures of woody shrubs and herbaceous species, such as chaparral
and sage vegetation, allow fires to spread easily on hillsides and in canyons. The potential
wildland fire hazard areas within the City is shown on Figure S-7. Fire hazards increase with
any drought periods and are highest for structures located within and at the fringe of forested or
wildland areas.



2
    2020 Fire Siege, CAL FIRE. https://www.fire.ca.gov/media/hsviuuv3/cal-fire-2020-fire-siege.pdf


                                                    S-20
                                                                                              RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                             City of Santa Clarita General Plan


                             Figure S-7: Fire Hazard Severity Zones




                                    Source: CAL FIRE, 2021

In addition to the damage caused directly by a foothill fire, further damage may be caused by
resulting mudslides during subsequent rains. High severity wildfires consume ground cover,
decrease surface roughness, and can produce a water repellent layer in the mineral soil. Intense
fire also reduces soil structure and incinerates shallow roots, which results in loss of mechanical
support, the formation of raveling, and an increase in erodible soil. These changes in vegetation,
litter, and soils lead to a much lower capacity for the soil to absorb rainfall and a much greater
potential for flooding, debris flows, and erosion.

The most significant fire that affected the area was the Tick Fire in 2019. The fire started on
October 24, 2019, near Tick Canyon Road and Summit Knoll Road in Canyon Country. It took
hundreds of firefighters over a week to contain the fire. The Tick Fire burned over 4,600 acres,




                                               S-21
                                                                                       RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                             City of Santa Clarita General Plan


destroyed 29 structures and damaged 45 additional structures. 3 Over 40,000 residents were
evacuated, and four firefighters were injured battling the fire. The Tick Fire left behind scarred
hillsides which increased the potential of future hazards from erosion, flooding, and debris flows
from annual rains. Additional recent significant fires in the area include the Sand Fire in 2016 and
the Rye Fire in 2017.

                       Figure S-8: Critical Facilities and Fire Hazard Areas




                          Source: CAL FIRE, City of Santa Clarita, 2021



3
 2019 Wildfire Activity Statistics, CAL FIRE.
https://www.fire.ca.gov/media/iy1gpp2s/2019_redbook_final.pdf


                                                S-22
                                                                                       RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                               City of Santa Clarita General Plan


Areas subject to wildland fire danger include portions of Newhall and Canyon Country, Sand
Canyon, Pico Canyon, Placerita Canyon, Hasley Canyon, White’s Canyon, Bouquet Canyon, and
other areas along the interface between urban development and natural vegetation in hillside
areas. Notably, several City-owned critical facilities are also within the Fire Hazard Severity Zone,
including the Transit Maintenance Facility, Newhall Community Center, the Santa Clarita
Metrolink station, and the George A. Caravalho Complex (see Figure S-8Error! Reference
source not found.). Fire hazard areas in Santa Clarita also include residential land uses,
educational facilities, and open space. There are approximately 22,593 buildings in Santa
Clarita’s VHFHSZ, including 19,002 residential buildings.

Wildland Fire Protection

Local fire response resources include those of the Los Angeles County Fire Department, the Fire
Services mutual aid system, the California Department of Forestry & Fire Protection, and the
United States Forest Service. The combination of forces applied will depend upon the severity of
the fire, other fires in progress, and the availability of resources. Suppression efforts can involve
fire apparatus, heavy fire equipment such as bulldozers, and aircraft with firefighting capabilities,
in addition to hand crews.

The Fire Department operates 9 fire suppression camps assigned to the Air and Wildland Division,
of which four camps employ paid personnel and six camps are staffed with inmate crews from
detention facilities. Wildland fire crews are used for fire protection, prevention, and suppression
activities. They attempt to control wildland fires by cutting a control line around the perimeter of a
fire, coordinating activities of bulldozers, and use of water-dropping helicopters and fixed wing
aircraft, as deemed appropriate. The Fire Department also oversees vegetation management for
fuel reduction and provides response to other emergency incidents as required.

Under a mutual aid agreement covering federal forest lands, responsibility for non-structure fires
within the National Forest belongs to the United States Forest Service (USFS), while LACFD has
the responsibility for suppressing structure fires. In practice, each agency cooperates in fighting
both wildland and structural fires during actual fire emergencies. There are USFS fire stations and
facilities located within the area.

LACFD also provides fire safety training to County residents and youth education programs on
fire safety and prevention. The City teams with the County to provide training to residents on fire
prevention and response, through the Community Emergency Response Training (CERT)
program, and other educational programs described in Section H of this element (Emergency
Preparedness and Response).

Residents with homes located in urban/wildland interface areas must bear some of the
responsibility for preventing the spread of wildland fires. Houses surrounded by brushy growth
rather than cleared space allow for greater continuity of fuel and increase the fire's ability to
spread. Homeowners should also consider whether their home is located near a fire station, has
adequate access for fire suppression vehicles, has adequate water supply for fire flow, is located
away from slopes or canyons which act to draw fires upward, and is constructed with fire-resistant
materials and design features, such as non-combustible roofing and boxed eaves. CAL FIRE has
issued guidelines for fuel reduction and other fire safety measures in urban/wildland interface




                                                S-23
                                                                                         RPC (4)(a)(ii)
     Safety                                                              City of Santa Clarita General Plan


     areas. 4 These guidelines were issued in response to recent changes to Public Resources Code
     Section 4291 that increased the defensible space clearance requirement from 30 feet to 100 feet
     around structures. For fire protection purposes, "defensible space" means the area within the
     perimeter of a parcel where basic wildfire protection practices are implemented. Characteristics
     important to this area include adequate emergency vehicle access, emergency water reserves,
     street names and building identification, and fuel modification measures. Fuel reduction through
     vegetation management around homes is the key to saving homes in hillside areas. The City,
     County and Fire Department will continue to provide public education programs about fire
     prevention strategies for residents in interface areas.

     After a fire has been suppressed in a wildland area, the work of restoration begins. The Burned
     Area Emergency Response (BAER) Team is a group of specialists in fields such as hydrology,
     soil sciences and wildlife management who evaluate damage to habitat areas from fires, and from
     firebreaks which may have been constructed to contain fires by cutting and clearing vegetation
     with earthmovers. In order to prevent erosion and re-establish vegetation consistent with native
     plant communities, appropriate planting and other management techniques must occur as soon
     as possible after a fire is extinguished.



F.   Severe Weather Conditions

     Severe weather threats for Santa Clarita Valley residents were identified in the City's Local Hazard
     Mitigation Plan as including extreme heat and high-velocity winds. Extreme heat results in
     excessive demands on the regional power grid to supply electricity for air conditioners. Long
     periods of extreme summer heat can affect the local water table levels and soil quality, increasing
     the risk of flash floods if rain occurs. In addition, extreme heat for extended periods increases the
     risk of wildland fires and exacerbates formation of ozone, resulting in impaired air quality.
     Exposure by humans to extreme heat conditions can result in heat exhaustion or heatstroke. Each
     year, about 445 Americans die as a result of exposure to excessive natural heat 5.

     The City is also subject to strong winds, with hot dry Santa Ana winds often reaching a velocity of
     60 miles per hour between the months of October and March. These winds may overturn trees,
     create unsafe driving conditions for motorists, and damage utility lines. They also create ideal
     conditions for the origin and spread of wildfires, by drying out vegetation and spreading sparks.
     On average, high wind events occur from 5 to 10 times per year in the area.

     The Local Hazard Mitigation Plan addressed these potential safety hazards, how climate change
     projects an increase in these hazards, and includes goals focused on public education regarding
     precautions against exposure to high heat and poor air quality; tree trimming programs to address
     falling limbs and trunks during high winds; participation in regional notification programs regarding
     power black-outs; debris management after windstorms; and undergrounding of utility lines.
     These severe weather conditions are also further discussed in Section L.




     4
       California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection, General Guidelines to Implement Performance
     Based Defensible Space Regulations under PRC 4291, 2005.
     5
       Annual average deaths from 2010-2019 with ICD Code X30; Centers for Disease Control and
     Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics. Underlying Cause of. Accessed at
     http://wonder.cdc.gov/ucd-icd10.html on Aug 3, 2021


                                                     S-24
                                                                                             RPC (4)(a)(ii)
     Safety                                                               City of Santa Clarita General Plan




G.   Hazardous Materials

     Hazardous materials include any substance or combination of substances which, because of
     quantity, concentration, or characteristics, may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in
     death or serious injury, or pose substantial hazards to humans and/or the environment. These
     materials may include pesticides, herbicides, toxic metals and chemicals, liquefied natural gas,
     explosives, volatile chemicals, and nuclear fuels.

     Within the area, a hazardous materials release or spill would most likely involve either
     transportation of materials by railroad or truck, use of hazardous materials at a business, or illegal
     dumping of hazardous wastes. Hazardous materials are transported to and through the area by
     vehicles using Interstate 5, State Routes 14 and 126, and the Union Pacific Railroad.

     California law provides a general framework for regulation of hazardous wastes by the Hazardous
     Waste Control Law (HWCL), passed in 1972. The Department of Toxic Substances Control
     (DTSC) is the State's lead agency for implementing the HWCL, which regulates hazardous waste
     facilities and requires permits for facilities involved in the generation, treatment, storage, and
     disposal of hazardous wastes. In 1986 the State passed the Tanner Act (AB 2948) which governs
     the preparation of hazardous waste management plans and siting of hazardous waste facilities.
     Under this Act each County must adopt a Hazardous Waste Management Plan. The Los Angeles
     County Hazardous Waste Management Plan provides direction for the proper management of all
     hazardous waste in the County and under contract with 38 cities, including Santa Clarita. They
     manage data on hazardous waste generation, existing treatment facilities, household and other
     small generator waste, and siting criteria for hazardous waste management facilities. Any such
     facility is required to consider protection of residents, surface and groundwater quality, air quality,
     environmentally sensitive areas, structural stability, safe transportation routes, social and
     economic goals.

     Within Los Angeles County, LACFD has the responsibility of regulating hazardous waste
     management through its Health Hazardous Materials Division (HHMD). The County's Public
     Works Department assists through implementation of the underground storage tank program.
     There are three County fire stations that handle hazardous materials incidents (known as
     Haz Mat Stations); Station 76 is located in Valencia and serves the Santa Clarita Valley.
     Emergency response to accidents associated with hazardous material is generally
     undertaken by the HHMD Division, pursuant to the Los Angeles County Fire/Health Haz Mat
     Administering Agency Plan. The transport of hazardous materials and explosives through the
     City on State highways and freeways is regulated by the State Department of Transportation
     (Caltrans).

     The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency maintains a list of all sites in the nation that are
     contaminated with hazardous substances. This list is known as the CERCLIS Database. The
     California Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC) also maintains a list of
     contaminated sites in the State for which it is providing oversight and enforcement of clean-
     up activities, known as the Cal-Sites Database. As of 2021, there were six sites in the City
     listed as active on the DTSC EnviroStor Database. Five of these sites undertook voluntary
     cleanup. The other site, the Whittaker-Bermite property is the most significant in terms of
     area and potential for redevelopment. This 996-acre site was previously used for explosive
     and flare manufacture. The site has undergone soil remediation for volatile organic
     compounds (VOCs) and perchlorate, completed in 2019, and is undergoing water


                                                     S-25
                                                                                              RPC (4)(a)(ii)
     Safety                                                           City of Santa Clarita General Plan


     remediation, overseen by the DTSC. Today the site is largely vacant and has been filled with
     fiber rolls, sandbags, and native plants to further restore the land. Due to residual
     concentrations of VOCs, some portions of the site will be restricted by a land use covenant.
     If future development of these areas includes sensitive uses such as residential uses or
     schools, DTSC will require additional evaluation and mitigation measures.

     A number of options are provided to help residents and businesses safely dispose of hazardous
     waste. The City's residential waste hauler (Waste Management) provides bulky item pickup
     service, which includes electronic waste (e-waste) such as old computers and televisions.
     Residents may also drop off e-waste items at the waste hauler's yard. The City partners with Los
     Angeles County for free household hazardous waste and e-waste round up events, currently
     hosted three times each year.

     Additionally, the County maintains two permanent S.A.F.E Collection Centers, the closest of these
     facilities is in Sun Valley (11025 Randall Street). Hazardous waste collection for businesses
     located in County areas must be arranged with private waste haulers. All hazardous waste
     collected is disposed of in a hazardous waste landfill. Information on City and County programs
     for disposal of hazardous waste is available on the websites of each agency.



H.   Emergency Preparedness and Response

     Emergency Operations Plan (EOP)

     The City has prepared an Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) to ensure the most effective
     allocation of resources for the protection of the population in an emergency. The EOP
     organizes emergency preparedness and response efforts and provides a framework for
     coordination with other agencies at the regional and state levels. This EOP addresses the
     response to emergency situations associated with natural disasters, technological incidents,
     and national security emergencies. The plan does not address normal day-to-day events, or
     well-established and routine procedures used in coping with such emergencies. Instead, the
     operational concepts reflected in this plan focus on potential large-scale disasters which can
     generate unique situations requiring unusual emergency responses. Each department of the
     emergency response organization is responsible for ensuring the preparation and
     maintenance of appropriate and current emergency operating procedures, resource lists, and
     checklists that detail how assigned responsibilities are performed to respond during a major
     disaster. The City’s EOP is flexible enough to be used in all emergencies and facilitate
     response and short-term recovery activities.

     The EOP was developed in accordance with the State-mandated Standardized Emergency
     Management System (SEMS) and the Federal mandated National Incident Management
     System (NIMS). SEMS and NIMS are based on the Incident Command System and the
     Multiple Agency Coordination System, both of which have been used by first responders and
     emergency managers for years.

     In addition to the EOP, the City maintains a Local Hazard Mitigation Plan (LHMP), which was
     updated in 2021. The City Council approved the LHMP in September 2021, with input from local
     and regional stakeholders including utility companies, school districts, regional agencies, and
     non-governmental agencies, as well as using a variety of methods to seek public input. The LHMP
     provides an analysis of potential hazards to assist the City in reducing risk and preventing loss


                                                   S-26
                                                                                          RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                               City of Santa Clarita General Plan


from natural hazard events, including earthquakes, floods, hazardous material spills, landslides
and earth movement, severe weather, and wildland fires. The plan describes existing mitigation
strategies and includes a matrix for mitigation actions and priorities over the next five years in
order to best “promote sound public policy regarding natural and man-made hazards,” with the
plan’s goals in order of priority to protect life and property, enhance natural systems, augment
emergency services, encourage partnerships and implementation, and promote public
awareness. Other considerations including mitigation rating, benefit-cost review, and scope of
impact, were also used in identifying priority mitigation items. The LHMP also identifies all critical
facilities and infrastructure (See Figure S-5 and Figure S-8and establishes goals to increase
emergency response and enhance recovery.

The City has implemented a regional telephone notification system operated by the County of Los
Angeles, Alert LA County, that will send information to residents and businesses within the Santa
Clarita Valley affected by, or in danger of, the impacts of an emergency or disaster. Emergency
response personnel can use the system to notify those homes and businesses that are at potential
risk with information on the events and/or actions (such as evacuation) that the City and local
public safety officials are asking them to take. Alert LA County uses the telephone companies’
911 database and is able to contact landline telephone numbers. Since cell phones are not
automatically included, is it also important for residents to register their phone online at
lacounty.gov/emergency/alert-la/. The County’s notification system includes the incorporated City
limits as well as areas outside the City. The school districts have separate notification systems,
and the County is preparing to implement a Countywide call system. In the event of evacuations,
LACFD directs the Sheriff's Department regarding areas that need to be evacuated. That
information is then shared with the City's Emergency Operations Center, and emergency
notification is then conveyed to residents.

Another method of relaying emergency-related information is through the City's Nixle Alert
system. This tool allows residents to receive emails and mobile phone text messages with public
safety alerts and information affecting the community. Residents can subscribe and automatically
receive emergency-related text alerts from the City by texting the term "SCEMERGENCY" to
888777 from any mobile phone device and mobile service provider, or by filling out their
information on the City’s website.

Community Preparedness and Training

The County and City both implement comprehensive programs for emergency preparedness,
including community involvement and training. To educate the public about emergency response,
the City and County cooperate to offer residents training through the Community Emergency
Response Training (CERT) program, which focuses on effective disaster/emergency response
techniques. The CERT program is designed to help families, neighborhoods, schools, and
businesses prepare for effective disaster and emergency response through training and pre-
planning. Program material covers earthquakes, fires, floods, hazardous materials incidents, and
other life-threatening situations. Participants attend seven weekly classes with a total of 21
classroom hours designed to help them recognize potential hazards and take appropriate actions;
identify, organize, and utilize available resources and people; and treat victims of life-threatening
conditions through Simple Triage and Rapid Treatment (START). From 2013 to 2019, an average
of 83 Santa Carita residents participated in the CERT program each year.

In 2020, CERT classes were postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. During this time, the
City offered a one-time virtual Disaster Preparedness class. The City’s CERT program is
anticipated to begin again in 2022.


                                                S-27
                                                                                         RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                              City of Santa Clarita General Plan


Once a year the City also presents an Emergency Expo, attended by several thousand residents,
at which residents are provided with information materials on emergency preparedness. Over 60
agencies and vendors participate in this event, in an effort to provide relevant information with an
interactive approach. The City promotes the CERT program at the Emergency Expo by using
CERT-trained volunteers to provide information at various booths and activities.

Through its emergency management program, the City also provides ongoing training and
outreach to schools, businesses, faith-based institutions, seniors, and the special needs
community. The City uses its website, City Hall, and local libraries as locations to distribute
information on disaster preparedness and response to residents.

The Santa Clarita Emergency Communications Team is a local chapter of the County Disaster
Communication Service and is registered as a civil defense organization under the Radio Amateur
Civil Emergency Service (RACES). The team's primary purpose is to supply emergency
communications for the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department and the City of Santa Clarita.
Members are volunteer amateur radio operators who assist other emergency responders by
enhancing communications services. Members also assist with the Santa Clarita Fire Watch
program and the School Emergency Communication Plan. In addition to emergency response,
the group assists with community events such as the Santa Clarita Marathon, Cowboy Poetry
Festival, and Fourth of July Parade.

In spite of these programs and the outreach efforts by the City and County, many residents are
not adequately prepared for emergencies. A 2007 County Department of Public Health Report
found that more than 20 percent of households in the County did not have emergency supplies
on hand, and only 41 percent of the respondents said they had an emergency plan for their family.
In a major disaster each household may need to survive on its own resources for several days
before help arrives. It is necessary for each family and head of household to proactively prepare
for emergencies by developing a plan and stockpiling adequate supplies. Information on how to
prepare for disasters is available on the City's website and through the training programs
described in this section.

Emergency Access

The Santa Clarita Valley has freeway access along only three routes - Interstate 5 and State
Route 14 going north and south, and State Route 126 going west - to use for evacuation purposes
in the event of an emergency such as fire or earthquake. Residents in some areas, such as
Stevenson Ranch and Castaic, will need alternate evacuation routes in case Interstate 5 is closed
during an emergency incident. City and County staff have developed alternate evacuation routes
along surface streets to provide alternate travel routes through and out of the Santa Clarita Valley.
Opening of the new Cross Valley Connector will also provide an effective east-west route for use
in the event of an emergency.

In addition to addressing evacuation routes, detour routes have been implemented through the
Santa Clarita Valley in the event that the local freeways are closed. The Santa Clarita Valley has
been affected by major highway closures that, like the 1994 Northridge Earthquake, cut off the
Santa Clarita Valley from the San Fernando Valley and beyond.

One of the most recent incidents occurred when a big rig crashed inside a truck route tunnel under
Interstate 5. The result was a 30-plus big rig and car pileup that cost three lives and caused the
two-day closure of the north and southbound lanes of Interstate 5. Interstate 5 is California's main
north/south highway, and locally, handles upwards of 250,000 cars per day. The resulting impacts


                                                S-28
                                                                                        RPC (4)(a)(ii)
     Safety                                                             City of Santa Clarita General Plan


     to local streets put the City of Santa Clarita's Emergency Operations Center into action, along
     with its state-of-the-art traffic monitoring and control technology.

     The 1994 Northridge Earthquake toppled the Interstate 5/State Route 14 interchange and the
     same interchange also collapsed during the 1971 Sylmar earthquake. Since that time, the
     interchange has been rebuilt to enhanced seismic standards. Caltrans has also tested all freeway
     bridges and interchanges in Los Angeles and Ventura Counties to ensure they met seismic
     standards for structural safety.

     During the development review process, emergency access is evaluated for all pending
     development projects. Two means of ingress and egress are required for all major development
     projects, including subdivisions and commercial/industrial sites. Adequate road and driveway
     widths are required to provide access to fire trucks, along with turnouts and turnaround areas
     where deemed necessary. Traffic control during evacuation procedures will be based upon the
     nature of the emergency and the condition of the roads. Temporary signage will be placed by the
     City and County Public Works Departments to ensure that evacuation routes are clearly marked
     for motorists.

     Additionally, the City of Santa Clarita will be identifying residential developments within hazard
     areas that do not have at least two emergency evacuation routes identified and identifying
     mitigation measures for each area to gather the following information.

               Table S-3: Residential Development Emergency Access Mitigation Measures 6

                  Residential                                           Emergency Access
                 Development                    Hazard                  Mitigation Measures
              Name or address of     All applicable hazard zones     List applicable mitigation
              development            (Fire, Seismic, Flooding)       measures


I.   Law Enforcement and Crime Prevention

     Police Protection

     Communities within the City are served by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department, which
     is housed within the Department's Santa Clarita Valley Station located on Magic Mountain
     Parkway and Golden Valley Road. The Station's service area covers 656 square miles, including
     both City and County areas and portions of the Angeles National Forest. The Sheriff's Department
     oversees general law and traffic enforcement within the City, while the California Highway Patrol
     (CHP) has jurisdiction over traffic on State highways and in unincorporated County areas. The
     location of the Santa Clarita Valley Sheriff’s Station is shown on Figure S-6.

     The Santa Clarita Valley Sheriff's Station serves an estimated resident population of 310,000
     persons. In the year 2021, the station was staffed by 205 sworn personnel and 34 civilian
     employees. Staffing levels and standards vary based on needs, performance level, and service
     modeling. Based on local conditions, the stations deploy an average of twelve deputies on AM



     6
      Table S-3 assists in the implementation of Implementation measure 24, found in Part 3 of the Safety
     Element


                                                    S-29
                                                                                            RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                               City of Santa Clarita General Plan


shifts, fourteen deputies on PM shifts, and eleven deputies on early morning shift in patrol.

Response times for law enforcement calls vary by time of day, number of officers on duty, traffic
conditions, and call volume. Calls for service are classified as Routine, Priority, or Emergent.
Routine calls, such as vandalism reports, do not require a priority response from field units. Priority
incidents, such as domestic disturbances, require an immediate response but not a "code three"
response. Emergent incidents, such as a traffic accident or shooting, require an automatic code
three response. The industry standard response times for service calls is as following: 60 minutes
for routine calls, 20 minutes for priority calls, and 10 minutes for emergency calls. Average
response time from the Santa Clarita Valley Sheriff’s Station for the 2020-2021 fiscal year were
74.5 minutes for routine calls, 13.9 minutes for priority calls, and 6.45 minutes for emergency
calls. This represents a slight decrease in response time for priority and emergency calls, and an
increase in routine call response time.

For the purpose of compiling crime statistics, the term Part I Crimes is used to describe the
most serious offenses, including homicide, rape, robbery, aggravated assault, burglary,
larceny, theft, grand theft auto, and arson. According to annual reports compiled by the
Sheriff's Department, the City of Santa Clarita and neighboring unincorporated areas
experienced a total of 2,967 Part I offenses in 2020, which represents a 31% decrease from
2015. In 2019, Santa Clarita had the lowest rate of Part I Crimes per population for California
cities with a population of 150,000 or more 7.

In addition to providing law enforcement and response services, the Sheriff's Department
uses community-oriented policing strategies to prevent crime and engages citizens in crime
prevention efforts through a number of programs. The Community Relations Unit at the
Sheriff's Station oversees community-oriented policing programs, including vacation security,
volunteer programs, the Explorer program, and other crime programs. Additionally the
station’s deputies hold regular meetings throughout the Santa Clarita Valley to educate the
public on crime prevention and provide information about personal safety, vehicle security,
and teen and parent survival. The Sheriff's Department also includes a ‘Victim Resources
and Crime Prevention Information’ page on its website listing information about avoiding
scam and fraud and resources for victims of crimes including human trafficking and sexual
assault. The Santa Clarita Station website includes information about wage theft
investigations, parole hearing victim representation, and online crime reporting.

In order to meet existing and projected needs for law enforcement programs and services in the
Santa Clarita Valley, the Sheriff's Department adopted a funding program for capital facilities to
accommodate the law enforcement needs of expected growth in the Santa Clarita Valley, through
collection of a law enforcement impact fee 8. Both the City and the County collect the law
enforcement fee on new development permits, to fund future facilities.

Detention Facilities

The Peter J. Pitchess Detention Center (Pitchess) in Castaic is the largest jail complex in the
County, and serves the Santa Clarita Valley, as well as other County areas. The jail consists of
four facilities, but only three are currently operated. The North Facility is a maximum-security


7
  FBI Unified Crime Reporting Program, California Table 8 ‘Offenses Known to Law Enforcement’, by City,
2019
8
  Santa Clarita Municipal Code 17.51.010 A


                                                S-30
                                                                                         RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                                City of Santa Clarita General Plan


facility with a housing capacity of 1,556. The East Facility, the oldest operational jail in the County,
has been renovated and houses a maximum capacity of 1,974 inmates. The North County
Correctional Facility is a maximum security complex housing a maximum capacity of 3,928
inmates. This facility also includes vocational training programs in the areas of computer sign
production, clothing manufacturing, and printing.

The Los Angeles County Probation Department provides secure detention for delinquent minors
in juvenile halls, and control and rehabilitations programs in Camp Scott and Camp Scudder.
Juvenile halls provide confinement to minors ranging in age from 8 to 18 who await adjudication
and disposition of legal matters. Camps provide treatment, care, custody, and training for the
rehabilitation of delinquent minors as wards of the juvenile court.

The Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors considered several detention facility expansion
plans, but instead chose to pursue other inmate rehabilitative services and other alternatives to
incarceration solutions. As of Fall 2021, there were no jail expansion projects under development.

Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design

One of the ways in which land use planning can assist law enforcement and promote public safety
is through incorporating crime prevention techniques into development site designs. This concept
was promoted by the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development in its 1996 publication
Creating Defensible Space by Oscar Newman 9. Newman first published his theories about
defensible space in 1972 and they were successfully adopted in many communities. The use of
environmental design features to prevent crime has been called CPTED (Crime Prevention
Through Environmental Design). In 1995 the City of Los Angeles issued CPTED Design
Guidelines based on the premise that "proper design and effective use of the built environment
can lead to a reduction in the incidents and fear of crime, reduction in calls for police services,
and to an increase in the quality of life.” 10 The County uses similar guidelines for public housing
facilities administered by the Community Development Commission.

According to Newman, "Defensible space operates by subdividing large portions of public spaces
and assigning them to individuals and small groups to use and control as their own private areas...
All defensible space programs have a common purpose: they restructure the physical layout of
communities to allow residents to control the areas around their homes. This includes the streets
and grounds outside their buildings and the lobbies and corridors within them." 11 In his studies of
St. Louis and other cities, Newman found that when residents had some control over public space
around their homes, they maintained these areas in a clean, safe condition. However, when
common areas were open to many dwelling units and to the public, with no oversight or
supervision by residents, these areas were subject to vandalism, dumping, and crime. Newman
found that crime was also influenced by building height and design. High­ rise residential buildings
(over four stories) were found to be unsuitable for families with children, although they could be
effective for senior communities if properly designed. Within public housing for families, he found
that project size and the number of dwelling units sharing common entries correlated to crime
rates. Large building size also affected residents' fear of crime and resulted in high rates of



9
  Newman, Oscar. Creating Defensible Space. U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development,
Office of Policy Development and Research. April 1996.
10
   Design Out Crime: Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design Guidelines, City of Los Angeles,
1995.
11
   Newman, page 2.


                                                 S-31
                                                                                          RPC (4)(a)(ii)
     Safety                                                               City of Santa Clarita General Plan


     residential turnover and vacancy.

     Defensible space is an important consideration in residential development, particularly in high­
     density, multiple family residential areas. Other CPTED principles include the following:

        •     Surveillance: Areas that are accessible to the public but are not readily visible, such as
              dead-end alleys and drive aisles, often attract crime. Surveillance is a design concept
              directed at keeping intruders under observation by locating windows overlooking
              common areas.

        •     Access control: Controlling access to a site protects users from crime by creating a
              perception of risk for potential offenders.

        •     Territorial reinforcement: The physical design of a site can contribute to a sense of
              territorial "ownership" by site users. Areas that are not clearly under the supervision of
              adjacent buildings are subject to trespass and illicit activities.

     CPTED design strategies include provision of adequate lighting; grouping common activity areas
     together to promote surveillance; providing clear travel paths with avoidance of dead-end
     pathways or drive aisles; provision of security devices such as fencing and cameras; clearly
     delineating public and private spaces; avoidance of "no man's land" areas on the site; providing
     secure, lighted storage areas; avoidance of long corridors shared by all and owned by none;
     encouraging neighborhood watch programs; use of landscaping to avoid graffiti; and elimination
     of hiding places within landscaped areas.

     Although neither the City nor County have formally adopted CPTED guidelines, safety issues are
     addressed through the development review process in both agencies. Policies have been added
     to the Safety Element to promote crime prevention through site design in future development
     decisions.



J.   Terrorism

     Terrorism is defined as the use of fear for intimidation. Terrorism is a crime where the threat of
     violence is often as effective as the commission of the violent act itself. Terrorism affects us
     through fear, physical injuries, economic losses, psychological trauma, and erosion of faith in
     government. Terrorism is a strategy used by individuals or groups to achieve their political goals.

     Terrorists espouse a wide range of causes. They can be for or against almost any issue, religious
     belief, political position, or group of people of one national origin or another. Because of the
     tremendous variety of causes supported by terrorists and the wide variety of potential targets,
     there is no place that is truly safe from terrorism. Throughout California there is a nearly limitless
     number of potential targets, depending on the perspective of the terrorist. Some of these targets
     include abortion clinics, religious facilities, government offices, public places (such as shopping
     centers), schools, power plants, refineries, utility infrastructure, water storage facilities, dams,
     private homes, prominent individuals, financial institutions and other businesses.

     The Federal Homeland Security Advisory System was established to provide a comprehensive
     and effective means to disseminate information regarding the risk of terrorist acts to Federal,
     State, and local authorities and citizens. The system provided warnings in the form of a set of



                                                      S-32
                                                                                              RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                               City of Santa Clarita General Plan


graduated "Threat Conditions" that would increase as the risk of the threat increases. This system
was in place from March 2002 to April 2011, when it was replaced by the National Terrorism
Advisory System (NTAS), designed to communicate information more effectively by providing
timely, detailed information about possible terrorist threats to the American public.

The NTAS provides advisories with information on terrorist threats, including steps that individuals
and communities can take to protect themselves from the threat or detect or prevent an attack, if
possible and applicable 12. These advisories consist of bulletins and alerts. Bulletins communicate
general trends regarding threats of terrorism, while alerts will include information on more specific
and credible threats.

Santa Clarita’s Emergency Preparedness Website also provides information in English and
Spanish about terrorism preparedness in the City, including information on the OES Safety
Information Line, a brochure on terrorism, and a list on steps for terrorism preparation.



Bioterrorism Planning

Bioterrorism is the threatened or intentional release of biological agents (virus, bacteria, or air
toxins) for the purpose of influencing the conduct of government or intimidating or coercing a
civilian population. These agents can be released by way of air (as aerosols), food, water, or
insects. Since the terrorist attacks of September 1, 2001, and the subsequent anthrax incidents,
there has been a great concern about bioterrorism in the United States. With this concern, there
is growing recognition that the unique characteristics of a bioterrorist attack, in contrast to a
conventional attack, would require additional response preparation and coordination.

An integral part of bioterrorism response is mass prophylaxis. Mass prophylaxis is the capability
to protect the health of the population through administration of critical intervention (e.g.,
antibiotics, vaccinations, antivirals) to mitigate the development of disease among those who are
exposed or potentially exposed to public health threats.

Every public health jurisdiction in the country is charged with the responsibility to develop and
maintain the capability to carry out first response and ongoing mass antibiotic dispensing, and
vaccination campaigns tailored to its local population.

There are two conceptual approaches to mass prophylaxis: "push" and "pull" approach; one is
utilizing the U.S. Postal Service to bring medications directly to individuals or homes in an affected
community. The "pull" approach requires that individuals travel to centers where they can receive
medications or vaccinations. Points of Dispensing (POD) are an example of the "pull" approach.

In preparation for a unique response to a bioterrorism attack, the City of Santa Clarita, the Los
Angeles County Department of Health, and the College of the Canyons (COC) have collaborated
to coordinate and respond with a drive-thru POD models to assist those potentially exposed to a
biological agent.

Utilizing the drive thru POD, the City, COC and Department of Health Services have tested the



12
   National Terrorism Advisory System (NTAS), 2021 https://www.dhs.gov/national-terrorism-advisory-
system


                                                S-33
                                                                                         RPC (4)(a)(ii)
     Safety                                                              City of Santa Clarita General Plan


     model by operating an influenza vaccination clinic. This program ran annually from 2006 to 2015
     and served as an opportunity to test the POD model while providing a vital real-world service to
     the general population. The POD program was supported by the COC Emergency Medical
     Technician program, the Community Emergency Response Training (CERT) Team, volunteers,
     and City staff from emergency management, recreation and community services, traffic
     engineering, and public works.

     Emergency Medical Services

     Los Angeles County Department of Health Emergency Services Agency developed a Disaster
     Resource Center (DRC) program to address issues related to healthcare surge capacity. There
     are 13 DRCs geographically located in Los Angeles County. In the Santa Clarita Valley, Henry
     Mayo Newhall Memorial Hospital (HMNMH) is one of the designated DRCs. As the designated
     DRC site, HMNMH is the lead for 11 other hospitals.

     DRCs are hospitals that address surge capacity in a disaster through procurement, storage,
     maintenance and security of extra medical equipment, supplies and pharmaceuticals. Each DRC
     works with hospitals, clinics and other healthcare providers in their geographic location to plan,
     train, exercise and facilitate regional disaster preparedness. Each DRC also has capability to
     mobilize storage trailers outfitted with equipment and supplies to set up a mobile triage area with
     inflatable surge tents.

     HMNMH has a medical cache and a pharmaceutical cache, ventilators, patient monitors,
     communication equipment, security equipment for crowd control, evacuation equipment and staff
     to manage the program. HMNMH also has the capability to expand and provide care with surgery
     beds, isolation areas, pharmaceuticals, personal protective equipment for chemical, biological,
     radiological, nuclear and explosive events (CBRNE), and decontamination facilities. In addition,
     HMNMH has a certified trained decontamination team, and staff trained in psychological first aid,
     and trauma burn care.

     When a disaster strikes and it is beyond the capability of the local jurisdictions, the affected area
     would contact Los Angeles County Medical Alert Center (MAC). MAC then would survey other
     DRC's for items requested.



K.   Accident Prevention

     Safety issues related to accident prevention overlap some of the other areas addressed in the
     General Plan. As with crime prevention, design features can be used to forestall accidents from
     trip-and-fall hazards on development sites through provision of adequate lighting, clearly
     delineated pathways, well-marked building entrances, and appropriate selection and
     maintenance of landscape material. Accidental injuries on trails and bikeways can be prevented
     through planning and design as well, including illumination, signage, traffic markings, adequate
     trail width and surface material, removal of hazardous landscaping and other obstructions, and
     safe crossings at intersections. Accidents involving vehicles, pedestrians and bicyclists within the
     public right-of-way can be minimized through installation of traffic control devices and
     implementation of other policies contained in the Circulation Element. Through the design review
     process, the layout of parking lots and driveways on new development projects is evaluated for
     potential conflicts between vehicles, delivery trucks, and pedestrians, in order to avoid potentially
     hazardous areas on the site. Both the City and County continually monitor traffic accident data in


                                                     S-34
                                                                                             RPC (4)(a)(ii)
     Safety                                                                  City of Santa Clarita General Plan


     order to determine if additional traffic control devices are needed to maintain public safety, and
     traffic improvements are installed where warranted.



L.   Climate Change Adaptation and Resiliency

     Due to recent hazard history and updated scientific understanding about the realities of a
     changing climate, SB 379 revised California Government Code Section 65302(g)(4), requiring
     cities and counties in California to update their plans to address climate adaptation and
     resiliency strategies. The requirements set by this new legislation may be met through a
     community’s Local Hazard Mitigation Plan (LHMP) or General Plan Safety Element. Santa
     Clarita incorporates the information from its LHMP into its General Plan, and summarized
     and supplements that information to best plan for the safety of its residents and meet
     statutory requirements, including:

         1. A vulnerability assessment identifying the risks that climate change poses to the local
            jurisdiction.
         2. A set of goals, policies, and objectives based on a vulnerability assessment for the
            protection of the community. (See Part 2)
         3. A set of feasible implementation strategies to carry out the goals, policies, and
            objectives. (See Part 3)
     Our changing climate, influenced by human-caused greenhouse gas emissions, is already
     contributing to changes in weather and climate extremes. The Sixth Assessment from the
     Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change reports that greenhouse gas emissions from human
     activities are responsible for approximately 1.1°C of warming globally since 1850-1900, and that
     in the next 20 years, we are likely to reach or exceed 1.5°C of warming. 13 Climate change affects
     not only temperature, but also affects global air circulation the water cycle, and leads to changes
     in the magnitude, frequency, duration, seasonality, and extent of climate-related impacts.

     The County of Los Angeles undertook a Climate Vulnerability Assessment 14 for the purpose of
     identifying social and physical vulnerabilities to climate hazards. At the time of this Safety Element
     update, the final report was not yet complete, but key findings that have been released have been
     included as part of the vulnerability assessment within this Element.

     Additionally, Santa Clarita’s Local Hazard Mitigation Plan (LHMP) describes hazards affecting the
     City and surrounding areas, analyzes vulnerabilities to certain hazards, identifies whether those
     hazards are projected to increase due to climate change, and includes strategies to mitigate risk.
     The identified impacts and vulnerabilities are summarized within this section of the Safety Element
     and are further described within the LHMP.

     Projected Impacts



     13
        IPCC, 2021: Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis.
     Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
     Change [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S. L. Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y. Chen, L.
     Goldfarb, M. I. Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J.B.R. Matthews, T. K. Maycock, T. Waterfield, O.
     Yelekçi, R. Yu and B. Zhou (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press. In Press.
     14
        https://ceo.lacounty.gov/ourcounty-cso-actions/; Accessed August 2, 2021


                                                       S-35
                                                                                                 RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                              City of Santa Clarita General Plan


As temperatures increase in Santa Clarita, the region is projected to experience a corresponding
increase in extreme weather conditions that may range from drought to wildfires to flooding.
Climate change may also cause indirect impacts, including public health impacts, economic
impacts, and increased inequity.

Information from hazard assessments in the LHMP combined with information from the web-
based tool Cal-Adapt has identified increases in the risk and likelihood associated with the
following hazards:

     •   Extreme Heat: Climate change is projected to increase the average temperature as well
         as the number of extreme heat days (Figure S-9) in Santa Clarita. Climate change induced
         heat can impact public health, put a strain on infrastructure, and can contribute to drying
         vegetation. Drier vegetation, along with drought impacts, can also contribute to wildfire
         risk. (See Section F: Severe Weather Conditions)
           Figure S-9: Timing of Projected Extreme Heat Day by Year in Santa Clarita: 15




15
  This chart displays a point for each day between April and October in a year when the daily maximum
temperature is above the extreme heat threshold of 101.2°F. Data is shown for Santa Clarita under the
RCP 4.5 scenario in which emissions peak around 2040, then decline.


                                                S-36
                                                                                        RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                                City of Santa Clarita General Plan


                            Source: Cal-Adapt, accessed August 1, 2021

   •     Drought: Southern California is susceptible to recurring periods of drought due to its
         location and topography. Climate change has increased the frequency and duration of
         drought events in the region. The worst drought in California’s recorded history occurred
         from December 2011 to March 2019. Santa Clarita is projected to experience more
         drought conditions like this due to climate change.
   •     Wildfire: Recent concerns about the effects of climate change, particularly drought
         effects, are contributing to concerns about wildfire vulnerability. With periods of drought,
         the fuel moisture drops significantly adding to increased fire danger. Over eighty percent
         of the Santa Clarita Valley is in a Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone (VHFHSZ) which
         is the Los Angeles County Fire Department and CAL FIRE’s highest classification for
         areas prone to wildfires. In the future, wildfire events in and around Santa Clarita are likely
         to increase. (See Section E: Fire Hazards).
   •     Flooding: Extreme weather events caused by climate change in the region include higher
         intensity individual precipitation events and “atmospheric rivers” which will increase
         flooding risk and flood related damages. Heavy, prolonged rainfall can stress stormwater
         infrastructure and river channels resulting in more flooding around streams, the river, and
         certain areas of the City. The Santa Clarita Valley is host to numerous streams, two dams,
         and the Santa Clara River, and has experienced damage from flood hazards in the past.
         (See Section D)
   •     Landslides: The projected intensity of climate-induced precipitation increases Santa
         Clarita’s likelihood of experiencing landslides. Because of the City’s varied topography,
         including significant ridgelines, this also increases chances for susceptibility to landslide
         events. Additionally, the heat from wildfires can create impervious surfaces for debris and
         mud flow, increasing vulnerabilities to mudslides and subsidence risks in Santa Clarita.
         The combination of an increase in wildfire activity and extreme precipitation is projected
         to increase landslide risks in Santa Clarita. (See Section C)
   •     Energy Disruption: As discussed, climate change is projected to increase hazards such
         as flooding, wildfire, and landslides. These hazards, as well as planned power outages for
         public safety from wildfires, increase the risk of energy disruption events in Santa Clarita,
         which also can affect the safety of residents.

Vulnerability Assessment

As defined by the California Adaptation Planning Guide (2020), climate change vulnerability is
considered the degree to which natural, built, and human systems are susceptible to harm from
exposure or stresses associated with climate change and from the absence of capacity to adapt.
Social climate vulnerability includes vulnerability due to age, gender, language, education, health,
housing, mobility, income, occupation, and ethnicity, among other factors. Physical climate
vulnerability includes vulnerability to communications facilities, energy, medical services,
transportation, waste, water, and natural systems, among other types of physical infrastructure.

Technical experts calculated the risk of hazards likely to affect Santa Clarita and described
communities and assets vulnerable to each risk. This section integrates information from the 2021
Local Hazard Mitigation Plan (LHMP), the Los Angeles County Climate Vulnerability Assessment
(CVA), and other local knowledge, using the most current knowledge available for each hazard.




                                                 S-37
                                                                                          RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                               City of Santa Clarita General Plan


   •     Extreme Heat: Santa Clarita’s vulnerabilities to heat include transportation, agriculture,
         energy, and water resources. Populations particularly vulnerable to extreme heat include
         people with pre-existing conditions, children, older adults, and outdoor workers. Increasing
         awareness about heat health emergencies and the physical impacts of heat are important
         to address these vulnerabilities.
   •     Drought: Santa Clarita’s vulnerabilities to drought include agriculture, livestock, energy,
         and local natural habitats. Populations particularly vulnerable to drought include older
         adults, rural communities, and low-income households. The City of Santa Clarita is
         working with local water agencies to develop new drought mitigation strategies in order to
         decrease the severity of this impact.
   •     Wildfire: Populations particularly vulnerable to wildfire include older adults living alone,
         people with limited access to transportation, people with limited mobility, and people with
         cardiovascular disease. Infrastructure vulnerable to wildfire includes communications,
         water, and community facilities. Wildfire vulnerability is highly variable depending on
         location and is typically higher in the hilly and mountainous areas of the City.
   •     Flooding and Extreme Precipitation: Populations particularly vulnerable to flooding and
         extreme precipitation include those living in mobile homes, outdoor workers, and
         households without vehicle access. Infrastructure vulnerable to flooding and extreme
         precipitation includes transportation, economic centers, and community centers. Flood
         risk is highly variable depending on location.
   •     Landslides: Populations particularly vulnerable to landslides are those living and working
         in areas with steep hillsides in areas where fire has occurred. Infrastructure particularly
         susceptible to landslides include roads, bridges, communication lines, utilities, and
         pipelines. Additionally, areas where wildfires or construction have destroyed vegetation,
         channels along a stream or river, steep slopes, and altered slopes are at an increased risk
         to experience landslides.
   •     Energy Disruption: Populations vulnerable to energy disruption include older adults and
         those dependent on electricity for medical needs. Portions of eastern and southern Santa
         Clarita are particularly vulnerable to energy disruption due to aging aboveground energy
         infrastructure that experiences more frequent outages. Additionally, areas of the city with
         higher wildfire risk face increased risk of energy disruption due to Public Safety Power
         Outage (PSPS) events. Santa Clarita leadership has advocated for hardening and
         electrical service reliability as Southern California Edison (SCE) develops their 2021
         Immediate Hardening Plan to reduce energy loss due to PSPS events to decrease these
         vulnerabilities.
The sections of this Element that address Fire Hazards, Flood Hazards, and Geologic Hazards
contain additional information including relevant historical data on natural hazard events,
agencies responsible for the protection of the public and the environment, descriptions of existing
and planned development, and maps including locally prepared information, which all contribute
to the vulnerability assessment. Table S-4 identifies which City-operated critical facilities are
vulnerable to which climate-related hazards. Figure S-5 and Figure S-8, in earlier sections, display
where these facilities are with respect to fire and flood hazard zones.




                                                S-38
                                                                                         RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                                               City of Santa Clarita General Plan


                Table S-4: City-owned Critical Facilities and Climate Vulnerabilities 16



                                                                                         Severe       Energy

                                                                Wildfire   Drought       Weather 17   Disruption   Flood

         Santa Clarita City Hall                                                                                 

         George A. Caravalho Santa Clarita Sports                                                              
         Complex/Gymnasium

         City of Santa Clarita ‘The Centre’                                                                    

         Public Works Corporate Yard                                                                           

         Santa Clarita Aquatics Center                                                                         

         Newhall Community Center                                                                              

         Central Park Maintenance Building                                                                       

         Santa Clarita Transit Maintenance Facility                                                              

         Metrolink Station – Santa Clarita                                                                       

         Metrolink Station – Via Princessa                                                                       

         Metrolink Station – Newhall                                                                             

         Canyon Country Community Center                                                                       

         Old Town Newhall Library                                                                   

         Canyon Country Jo Anne Darcy Library                                                                   

         Valencia Branch Library                                                                    

         The Cube                                                                                   


Climate Change Adaptation

“Adaptation is an adjustment in natural or human systems to a new or changing environment.
An adaptation adjustment moderates harm or exploits beneficial opportunities brought about by


16
   For this chart, the identification of which facilities are vulnerable to which hazards is based on the analysis
done for the 2021 LHMP, Table 3-5: City Owned & Non-City Owned Facilities.
17
   In the 2021 LHMP, Extreme Heat and Extreme Wind are analyzed together as one hazard, Severe
Weather


                                                      S-39
                                                                                                                   RPC (4)(a)(ii)
     Safety                                                                    City of Santa Clarita General Plan


     the change.” 18

     In Santa Clarita, climate change adaptation involves drought mitigation strategies,
     addressing public health impacts, hardening infrastructure and buildings, and locating
     development in safer areas when feasible.

     Climate Change Resiliency

     “Resilience is the capacity of any entity—an individual, a community, an organization, or a natural
     system—to prepare for disruptions, to recover from shocks and stresses, and to adapt and grow
     from a disruptive experience. A community’s resilience is determined by its ability to survive,
     adapt, and thrive no matter what acute shock or chronic stressor it experiences.” 19

     In Santa Clarita, climate change resilience involves preparing community members and
     infrastructure to manage and recover from climate impacts, including extreme heat, wildfire,
     and drought conditions. Strategies to achieve this may include building retrofits, public
     education programs, culturally literate community outreach, distribution of emergency
     resources, urban tree planting, and availability of cooling centers.

     Specific adaptation and resilience strategies for landslides, flood hazards, fire hazards, and
     severe weather conditions (extreme heat and wind) can be found in sections C, D, E, and F
     of the Safety Element respectively. Additionally, the emergency preparedness and response
     section of this Element, section H, contains strategies to increase resiliency through
     community preparedness, emergency preparedness, and disaster response and recovery.

     Adaptation and Resiliency goals, objectives and policies can be found in Part 2 of this
     Element, and implementation measures can be found in Part 3.



M.   Summary of Safety Planning Needs in the Santa Clarita Valley

     Based on the existing conditions and issues outlined in the background sections of the Safety
     Element, safety planning needs for the Santa Clarita Valley are summarized below. Policies and
     objectives in the following section have been developed to address these needs.

           1. Reduce risks to public safety and property from seismic activity and related hazards,
              through identification of seismic hazard zones and requirements for seismic design.

           2. Identify and mitigate hazards from soil instability, including landslides and subsidence,
              through identification of hazard areas and requirements for design mitigations to address
              unstable soils.

           3. Plan for and ensure construction and maintenance of adequate flood control facilities to
              protect existing and future residents from flood hazards.

           4. Identify risks from, and plan for emergency response, in the event of dam failure from the



     18
          Planning and Investing for a Resilient California: A Guidebook for State Agencies, 2018
     19
          See 18


                                                         S-40
                                                                                                    RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                           City of Santa Clarita General Plan


         Castaic or Bouquet Canyon Reservoirs.

   5. Address drainage improvement needs to mitigate localized flooding problems.

   6. Require Low Impact Development techniques in planning and construction, to reduce
      stormwater runoff, promote infiltration, and reduce the need for costly flood control
      infrastructure.

   7. Control and regulate new development and construction in identified floodplains by
      applying appropriate development standards and implement federal floodplain
      management policies to protect public safety and property.

   8. Promote planning for and coordination with the Los Angeles County Fire Department to
      construct new fire stations as needed throughout the Santa Clarita Valley.

   9. Adopt and implement policies for fire-safe development in urban/wildland interface areas.

   10. Require adequate emergency access, street identification, and address numbers in all
       development, to ensure timely response to emergencies.

   11. Identify, sign, maintain, and provide public information regarding evacuation routes
       through and out of the Santa Clarita Valley, in the event of a major disaster.

   12. Continue coordinating with other agencies to provide information and training to residents
       about maintaining adequate firebreaks in wildland interface areas.

   13. Ensure provision of adequate fire flow for new development.

   14. Continue providing tree maintenance services for trees on public property as part of the
       urban forestry management program, to limit damage during windstorms from falling
       limbs.

   15. Protect residents from the harmful effects of hazardous materials through appropriate
       zoning and development standards and coordinate with other agencies as needed on
       clean-up efforts for contaminated areas.

   16. Continue to prepare, update, and implement emergency preparedness procedures and
       response plans.

   17. Continue to provide training to public officials and residents on emergency preparedness
       and response.

   18. Cooperate with the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department to expand facility space in
       the Santa Clarita Valley to meet current and projected law enforcement needs.

   19. Promote crime prevention through public education and support of Neighborhood
       Watch, Business Watch, and CPTED (Crime Prevention Through Environmental
       Design) programs.

   20. Promote measures to prevent accidental injury by ensuring adequate lighting,
       addressing trip and fall hazards, analyzing traffic accident data and providing traffic
       safety improvements where needed, promoting walkable neighborhoods, ensuring


                                             S-41
                                                                                     RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                        City of Santa Clarita General Plan


         safe trails, and other similar programs.

   21. Cooperate with appropriate agencies and the public to create a plan to prepare for
       and respond to potential terrorist activities.

   22. Prepare for an increased level of risk from natural hazards projected to increase due
       to climate change.




                                              S-42
                                                                                  RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                                City of Santa Clarita General Plan


PART 2:         SAFETY GOALS, OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES

Geological Hazards

Goal S 1:     Protection of public safety and property from hazardous geological conditions,
including seismic rupture and ground shaking, soil instability, and related hazards.

         Objective S 1.1: Identify and map areas in the Santa Clarita Valley that are
         susceptible to geological hazards, for use by the public and decision makers in
         considering development plans.

                Policy S 1.1.1: Maintain maps of potentially active faults and fault zones,
                based on information available from the Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zone
                maps, United States Geological Survey, State Board of Geologists, State
                Mining and Geology Board, and other appropriate sources.

                Policy S 1.1.2: Maintain maps of areas subject to liquefaction and
                landslides, based on data provided by the State and other appropriate sources.

                Policy S 1.1.3: In the event of significant incidents of soil subsidence,
                compile data and prepare maps showing areas with potential for this hazard.

                Policy S 1.1.4:    Maintain maps showing potential inundation areas from dam
                failure.

         Objective S 1.2: Regulate new development in areas subject to geological hazards
         to reduce risks to the public from seismic events or geological instability.

                Policy S 1.2.1: Implement requirements of the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake
                Fault Zoning Act.

                Policy S 1.2.2: Restrict the land use type and intensity of development in
                areas subject to fault rupture, landslides, or liquefaction, in order to limit exposure
                of people to seismic hazards.

                Policy S 1.2.3: Require soils and geotechnical reports for new construction
                in areas with potential hazards from faulting, landslides, liquefaction, or
                subsidence, and incorporate recommendations from these studies into the site
                design as appropriate.

                Policy S 1.2.4:    Enforce seismic design and building techniques in local building
                codes.

                Policy S 1.2.5: Consider the potential for inundation from failure of the Castaic
                or Bouquet Canyon Reservoir dams when reviewing development proposals within
                potential inundation areas.

         Objective S 1.3: Reduce risk of damage in developed areas from seismic activity.

                Policy S 1.3.1: Identify any remaining unreinforced masonry buildings or other
                unstable structures and require remediation or seismic retrofitting as needed to



                                                 S-43
                                                                                          RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                                City of Santa Clarita General Plan


                meet seismic safety requirements.

                Policy S 1.3.2: Increase earthquake safety in all public facilities through bracing
                of shelves, cabinets, equipment, and other measures as deemed appropriate.

                Policy S 1.3.3: Provide informational materials to the public on how to make
                their homes and businesses earthquake safe.

                Policy S 1.3.4: Cooperate with other agencies as needed to ensure regular
                inspections of public infrastructure such as bridges, dams, and other critical
                facilities, and require repairs to these structures as needed to prevent failure in the
                event of seismic activity.

Flood Hazards

Goal S 2:       Protection of public safety and property from unreasonable risks due to flooding.

         Objective S 2.1: Plan for flood protection as part of a multi-objective watershed
         management approach for the Santa Clara River and its tributaries.

                Policy S 2.1.1: On the Land Use Map, designate appropriate areas within the
                floodplain as open space for multi-use purposes, including flood control, habitat
                preservation, and recreational open space. Development in the floodplain will
                require mitigation as deemed necessary by the reviewing authority.

                Policy S 2.1.2: Promote Low Impact Development standards on development
                sites, including but not limited to minimizing impervious surface area and
                promoting infiltration, in order to reduce the flow and velocity of stormwater runoff
                throughout the watershed.

                Policy S 2.1.3: Promote the use of vegetated drainage courses and soft-bottom
                channels for flood control facilities to the extent feasible, in order to achieve water
                quality and habitat objectives in addition to flood control.

                Policy S 2.1.4: Cooperate with other agencies as appropriate regarding the
                related issues of flood control, watershed management, water quality, and habitat
                protection.

                Policy S 2.1.5: Promote the joint use of flood control facilities with other
                beneficial uses where feasible, such as by incorporating detention basins into
                parks and extending trails through floodplains.

         Objective S 2.2: Identify areas in the Santa Clarita Valley that are subject to inundation
         from flooding.

                Policy S 2.2.1: Prepare and maintain maps of floodways and floodplains based
                on information from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and
                other appropriate sources, in order to qualify for FEMA's National Flood Insurance
                Program.

                Policy S 2.2.2:    Identify areas subject to localized short-term flooding due to



                                                 S-44
                                                                                          RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                                City of Santa Clarita General Plan


                drainage deficiencies.

         Objective S 2.3: Plan for and construct adequate drainage and flood control
         infrastructure to ensure flood protection.

                Policy S 2.3.1: Implement drainage master plans designed to handle storm
                flows from the 100-year storm.

                Policy S 2.3.2: Include funding for drainage and flood control improvements in
                the annual City budget.

         Objective S 2.4: Implement flood safety measures in new development.

                Policy S 2.4.1: Require that new development comply with FEMA floodplain
                management requirements and local flood mitigation standards as conditions of
                development.

                Policy S 2.4.2: On the Land Use Map, restrict the type and intensity of land use
                in flood-prone areas, or require flood-proof construction, as deemed appropriate.

                Policy S 2.4.3   Locate, when feasible, new essential public facilities outside of
                flood hazard zones, including hospitals and health care facilities, emergency
                shelters, fire stations, emergency command centers, and emergency
                communications facilities.

         Objective S 2.5: Limit risks to existing developed areas from flooding.

                Policy S 2.5.1: Address drainage problems that cause flooding on prominent
                transportation corridors by working with multi-jurisdictional agencies and
                stakeholders to construct needed drainage improvements.

                Policy S 2.5.2: Provide for the maintenance of drainage structures and flood
                control facilities to avoid system malfunctions and overflows.

                Policy S 2.5.3      Encourage flood safety retrofits and pursue retrofits and
                mitigation strategies for essential public facilities identified as vulnerable to flood
                hazards.

Fire Hazards

Goal S 3:       Protection of public safety infrastructure and property from fires.

         Objective S 3.1: Provide adequate fire protection infrastructure to maintain acceptable
         service levels as established by the Los Angeles County Fire Department.

                Policy S 3.1.1: Coordinate on planning for new fire stations to meet current and
                projected needs.

                Policy S 3.1.2: Program adequate funding for capital fire protection costs and
                explore all feasible funding options to meet facility needs.



                                                 S-45
                                                                                          RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                             City of Santa Clarita General Plan


                Policy S 3.1.3: Require adequate fire flow and adequate fire protection as a
                condition of approval for all new development

                Policy S 3.1.4: Maintain adequate fire flow infrastructure, including identifying
                location of anticipated additional water supply, maintenance, and long-term
                integrity of water supply, which may include installation of additional reservoir
                capacity and/or distribution facilities.

         Objective S 3.2: Provide for the specialized needs of fire protection services in both
         urban and wildland interface areas.

                Policy S 3.2.1: Identify areas of the Santa Clarita Valley that are prone to
                wildland fire hazards adopt current CAL FIRE Fire Hazard Severity Zone maps
                and address these areas in fire safety plans.

                Policy S 3.2.2:    Enforce standards for maintaining defensible space around
                structures, roadside fuel reductions, and consider establishing community fire
                breaks through clearing of dry brush and vegetation.

                Policy S 3.2.3: Establish landscape guidelines for fire-prone areas with
                recommended plant materials and provide this information to builders and
                members of the public.

                Policy S 3.2.4: Require sprinkler systems, fire resistant roofs and building
                materials, and other construction measures deemed necessary to prevent loss of
                life and property from wildland fires.

                Policy S 3.2.5: Ensure adequate secondary and emergency access for fire
                apparatus, which includes minimum requirements for road width, surface material,
                grade, and staging areas.

                Policy S 3.2.6: Continue to provide information and training to the public on fire
                safety in wildland interface areas.

                Policy S 3.2.7: Implement wildfire mitigation strategies as identified in the Local
                Hazard Mitigation Plan, including community education, evaluating access routes,
                and prescribed burning.

         Objective S 3.3: Maintain acceptable emergency response times throughout the
         planning area.

                Policy S 3.3.1: Plan for fire response times of no more than five minutes in
                urban areas, eight minutes in suburban areas, and 12 minutes in rural areas.

                Policy S 3.3.2: Require the installation and maintenance of street name signs
                on all new development and the posting of address numbers on all homes and
                businesses that are clearly visible from adjacent streets.




                                               S-46
                                                                                       RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                               City of Santa Clarita General Plan


                Policy S 3.3.3: Identify evacuation routes and their capacity, safety, and
                viability under a range of emergency scenarios, and plan for the evacuation needs
                of developments with only one point of access.

                Policy S 3.3.4: Maintain training standards in wildfire operations, incident
                command, evacuations, command and control, aviation, pre-fire engineering,
                prevention, public information, and resource management.

         Objective S 3.4: Maintain development standards and land use regulations that prioritize
         fire safe development.

                Policy S 3.4.1: Ensure that all new development and redevelopment in Fire
                Hazard Severity Zones comply with Board of Forestry requirements, Fire Safe
                Regulations, and current versions of the California Building Code (CBC), California
                Fire Code (CFC), and Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations (CCR).

                Policy S 3.4.2: Strive to minimize new residential development in Very High
                Fire Hazard Severity Zones by giving processing and funding preference to new
                residential developments outside of the VHFHSZ. Ensure that all new residential
                developments located within the VHFHSZ meet or exceed all applicable Fire Safe
                Standards

                Policy S 3.4.3: Locate critical facilities and essential public facilities outside
                Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zones when feasible.

                Policy S 3.4.4: Require new development in Very High Fire Hazard Severity
                Zones to develop fire protection plans and enter into long term vegetation
                landscape maintenance agreements, and maintain access for emergency
                response vehicles, and require new residential development to maintain Fuel
                Modification Plans.

                Policy S 3.4.5: Pursue retrofits and mitigation strategies for essential public
                facilities identified as vulnerable to wildfire hazards and for residential
                developments with only one point of access.

         Objective S 3.5: Work cooperatively with relevant organizations and agencies for fire
         prevention, protection, and response.

                Policy S 3.5.1: Continue to work with Los Angeles County Fire Department and
                CAL FIRE to ensure data is adequately recorded, documented, and received by
                CAL FIRE.

                Policy S 3.5.2: Continue to work with partnering agencies, foster cooperative
                relationships, conduct periodic fire-related training, and participate in joint agency
                planning and preparedness meetings in preparation for incidents requiring multi-
                jurisdictional coordinated response.

                Policy S 3.5.3: For areas adjacent to the National Forest, cooperate with the
                United States Forest Service regarding land use and development issues. (moved)



                                                S-47
                                                                                         RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                           City of Santa Clarita General Plan


                Policy S 3.5.4: Work cooperatively with responsible agencies                  and
                nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) to plan for post-fire recovery.

Hazardous Materials

Goal S 4:       Protection of public safety and property from hazardous materials.

         Objective S 4.1: Identify sites that are contaminated with chemicals and other
         hazardous materials and promote clean-up efforts.

                Policy S 4.1.1: Continue to support clean-up efforts and re-use plans for the
                Whittaker-Bermite property.

                Policy S 4.1.2: Coordinate with other agencies to address contamination of
                soil and groundwater from hazardous materials on various sites and require
                that contamination be cleaned up to the satisfaction of the City and other
                responsible agencies prior to issuance of any permits for new development.

         Objective S 4.2:    Cooperate with other agencies to ensure proper handling,
         storage, and disposal of hazardous materials.

                Policy S 4.2.1: On the Land Use Map, restrict the areas in which activities
                that use or generate large amounts of hazardous materials may locate, to
                minimize impacts to residents and other sensitive receptors in the event of a
                hazardous materials incident.

                Policy S 4.2.2: Through the development review process, ensure that any
                new development proposed in the vicinity of a use that stores or generates
                large amounts of hazardous materials provides adequate design features,
                setbacks, and buffers to mitigate impacts to sensitive receptors in the event of
                a hazardous materials incident.

                Policy S 4.2.3: Require businesses to verify procedures for storage, use,
                and disposal of hazardous materials.

                Policy S 4.2.4: Cooperate with other agencies to hold regular events to
                promote safe disposal of small amounts of household hazardous waste,
                including e­ waste, by Santa Clarita Valley residents .

Law Enforcement

Goal S 5:    Protection of public safety through the provision of law enforcement services
and crime prevention strategies.

         Objective S 5.1: Cooperate with the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department's
         plans for expansion of facility space to meet current and future law enforcement needs
         in the Santa Clarita Valley.

                Policy S 5.1.1: Participate in a multi-jurisdictional task force to evaluate
                alternatives for combining public safety services with administrative services
                within a centralized government complex serving the entire Santa Clarita



                                              S-48
                                                                                     RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                             City of Santa Clarita General Plan


                Valley.

                Policy S 5.1.2: Provide staff assistance to assess future law enforcement
                needs, and work together with the County, Sheriff's Department, and other
                partners to develop and implement plans for meeting these needs.

                Policy S 5.1.3: Cooperate on implementation of funding mechanisms for law
                enforcement services.

         Objective S 5.2: Cooperate with the Sheriff's Department on crime prevention programs
         to serve residents and businesses.

                Policy S 5.2.1: Promote and participate in the Business Watch program to
                assist business owners in developing and implementing crime prevention
                strategies.

                Policy S 5.2.2: Promote and support Neighborhood Watch programs to assist
                residents in establishing neighborhood crime prevention techniques.

                Policy S 5.2.3: Provide code enforcement services to maintain minimum health
                and safety standards and as a deterrent to crime.

Accidents

Goal S 6:       Reduced risk to public safety and property damage from accidental occurrences.

         Objective S 6.1: Reduce damage from high winds through effective urban forest
         management.

                Policy S 6.1.1: Continue tree trimming and maintenance programs for trees in
                the right-of-way and on public property, to limit damage from falling limbs.

                Policy S 6.1.2: Promote the planting of tree types appropriate to the local
                climate, to avoid breakage by brittle, non-native trees.

         Objective S 6.2: Increase public safety through the design of public facilities and urban
         spaces.

                Policy S 6.2.1: In designing or reviewing development plans, ensure that
                lighting levels are adequate to provide safe and secure nighttime use of each site,
                while limiting excessive or unnecessary light and glare.

                Policy S 6.2.2: In reviewing development plans, consider Crime Prevention
                Through Environmental Design (CPTED) principles to increase public safety
                through establishing defensible space, clearly delineated public and private areas,
                and effective surveillance of common areas.

                Policy S 6.2.3: In designing or reviewing development plans, ensure that
                pedestrian pathways, stairs, steps, and ramps are designed to provide clear and
                unimpeded passage in order to avoid trip hazards and conflicts with vehicles.

                Policy S 6.2.4:   Continue to monitor traffic accident data in order to evaluate and


                                               S-49
                                                                                       RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                            City of Santa Clarita General Plan


               address any traffic control needs to enhance public safety.

               Policy S 6.2.5: Use traffic calming devices and reduced street widths to slow
               traffic speeds and reduce accidents, where deemed appropriate.

         Objective S 6.3: Provide for the safety of disadvantaged persons.

               Policy S 6.3.1: In cooperation with other agencies, ensure adequate shelter
               for homeless persons to limit their exposure to accidental injury and illness.

               Policy S 6.3.2: Implement the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities
               Act to ensure safe travel paths and accommodations for persons with
               disabilities.

         Objective S 6.4: Minimize damage resulting from aircraft accidents near Agua Dulce
         Airpark.

               Policy S 6.4.1: Support efforts by Los Angeles County to require all new
               development in the vicinity of the Agua Dulce Airpark to comply with the
               County's Airport Land Use Plan and applicable Federal Aviation Administration
               (FAA) regulations.

Emergency Planning

Goal S 7:     Protection of the public through planning for disaster response and recovery,
in order to minimize damage from emergency incidents or terrorist activities.

         Objective S 7.1: Maintain and implement plans and procedures to prepare for
         disaster response and terrorist activities.

               Policy S 7.1.1: Regularly update emergency preparedness and response
               plans that are consistent with State plans.

               Policy S 7.1.2: Continue to provide regular training to public officials and the
               public on emergency procedures.

               Policy S 7.1.3: Ensure that evacuation routes are clearly posted throughout
               the Santa Clarita Valley.

               Policy S 7.1.4: Strengthen communication and cooperation between
               agencies, citizens, and non-profit groups to plan for disaster response.

               Policy S 7.1.5: Maintain strong cooperative working relationships with public
               agencies responsible for flood protection, fire protection, and hazard response.

         Objective S 7.2: Plan for ways to minimize economic and social disruption and
         expedite recovery from emergency incidents.

               Policy S 7.2.1: In cooperation with other agencies, plan for temporary
               shelters for residents displaced by disasters and emergency incidents.

               Policy S 7.2.2:   Plan for expedited plan check, permitting, and inspection


                                              S-50
                                                                                      RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                          City of Santa Clarita General Plan


               programs to aid recovery efforts involving the rebuilding of damaged
               structures.

               Policy S 7.2.3: Ensure that proper record-keeping procedures are in place
               for purposes of obtaining reimbursement from State and federal agencies.

               Policy S 7.2.4: Purchase disaster and recovery supplies locally to assist local
               businesses in their recovery efforts.

Climate Adaptation

Goal S 8:    Protection of the public from climate change related hazards through
adaptation and mitigation strategies

         Objective S 8.1: Increase public safety through community awareness of climate
         change and its impacts.

               Policy S 8.1.1: Publish and regularly update information on the status of
               climate related hazards and their impacts.

               Policy S 8.1.2: Provide opportunities for public officials to learn about
               climate change and its impacts.

               Policy S 8.1.3: Increase participation of low-income, immigrant, non-
               English-speaking, racially and ethnically diverse, and special needs residents
               throughout climate action planning and implementation.

               Policy S 8.1.4: Use performance metrics and data to evaluate and monitor
               the impacts of climate change strategies on public health and social equity.

               Policy S 8.1.5: Use the Nixle Alert Message system to inform citizens about
               upcoming and ongoing climate-related hazards, including resources such as
               available shelters or cooling centers, if applicable.

         Objective S 8.2: Maintain acceptable infrastructure to withstand the impacts of
         climate change.

               Policy S 8.2.1: Assess impact of climate change on community
               infrastructure and incorporate consideration of climate change impacts as part
               of infrastructure planning and operations.

               Policy S 8.2.2: Encourage retrofits that address climate concerns, including
               high efficiency air conditioning or alternative cooling systems that decrease
               energy demand while promoting public health and safety.

               Policy S 8.2.3: Prioritize climate mitigation actions and retrofits in
               neighborhoods that currently experience social or environmental injustice or
               bear a disproportionate burden of potential public health impacts.

               Policy S 8.2.4: Support green infrastructure, such as bioswales, permeable
               pavements, green roofs, rainwater harvesting, and alternative irrigation



                                             S-51
                                                                                    RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                           City of Santa Clarita General Plan


                techniques, such as subsurface drip irrigation, to manage extreme weather
                hazards and to reduce use of climate-sensitive water supplies.

         Objective S 8.3: Plan cooperatively within all City departments, as well as with other
         local, state, and federal agencies and stakeholders, in order to address climate
         hazards.

                Policy S 8.3.1: Utilize successful community-based programs and
                partnerships with community-based organizations to communicate climate
                risks and available resources to the public.

                Policy S 8.3.2: Continue collaborating in County, State, and regional-level
                climate research, planning, and action.

                Policy S 8.3.3: Integrate climate adaptation and resiliency considerations
                into the next update of the Santa Clarita Climate Action Plan, Capital
                Improvement Plans, and the General Plan.




                                              S-52
                                                                                     RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                            City of Santa Clarita General Plan


PART 3:       IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SAFETY ELEMENT

The City will implement the goals, objectives, and policies of the Safety Element of the City of
Santa Clarita General Plan through the following actions:

   1. On the Land Use Map, designate areas that are subject to potential damage from natural
      or man-made hazards for appropriate land uses, such as open space or low-density
      residential, in order to reduce exposure of persons and property to hazardous conditions.

   2. Revise the City's Unified Development Code and other development-related ordinances
      as needed to ensure consistency with the goals and policies of the Safety Element.

   3. Through the review process for new discretionary development applications, require
      consistency with the goals and policies of the Safety Element, including requirements to
      mitigate hazards from seismic, geotechnical, soils, flooding, fire, crime, or other unsafe
      conditions as appropriate.

   4. Update master plans for drainage, streets, emergency services, and other City
      infrastructure and facilities as needed to conform with the goals and policies of the Safety
      Element.

   5. Update the City's Capital Improvement Program as appropriate to incorporate capital
      projects needed to implement goals and policies of the Safety Element, such as drainage
      and street improvements.

   6. As part of the annual General Plan review process, conduct an annual review of the Safety
      Element, along with other General Plan elements, to determine compliance, and file a
      report with the California Office of Planning and Research and Department of Community
      Development pursuant to Government Code Section 65400(a) (2).

   7. Ensure that any acquisition of real property for public use is consistent with the Safety
      Element and other General Plan elements, pursuant to Government Code Section 65402.

   8. In cooperation with the County, implement compatible policies and guidelines for hillside
      development within the Santa Clarita Valley, to protect the public from landslides and other
      geotechnical hazards.

   9. In cooperation with the County, implement compatible policies and guidelines for flood
      control and drainage improvements, to protect the public from regional and local flooding
      (including dam inundation).

   10. In cooperation with the County, implement compatible policies for wildland fire safety,
       including but not limited to fuel reduction and defensible space, building materials and
       design, emergency access and evacuation routes, and fire flow requirements, to protect
       the public from wildfires.

   11. Ensure compliance with seismic safety standards through plan review and inspection
       procedures on all new construction, pursuant to adopted codes and ordinances.

   12. Review any proposed General Plan Amendments to ensure compliance with
       applicable goals and policies of the Safety Element; coordinate this review with the



                                              S-53
                                                                                      RPC (4)(a)(ii)
Safety                                                            City of Santa Clarita General Plan


         County as appropriate.

   13. Monitor effectiveness of the Safety Element in achieving the goals of protecting
       property, public health, and safety; initiate amendments thereto as needed to meet
       changing conditions, needs, and policies, coordinating such amendments with the
       County as appropriate.

   14. Continue implementing emergency preparedness plans and procedures, updating
       them as needed and providing training to staff and the general public on emergency
       preparedness, response, and recovery.

   15. Continue to cooperate with the County and other agencies as needed to respond to
       emergencies throughout the Santa Clarita Valley.

   16. Cooperate with the County Fire Department in its efforts to plan for and construct new
       fire station facilities within the Santa Clarita Valley, which may include coordination on
       determining appropriate locations and evaluating various funding mechanisms for
       new facilities and services.

   17. Cooperate with the County Sheriff's Department in its efforts to plan for expansion of
       law enforcement services to serve the Santa Clarita Valley, which may include
       coordination on determining appropriate station locations and evaluating various
       funding mechanisms for new facilities and services.

   18. Continue cooperating with the County and other appropriate entities on control of
       hazardous substances, addressing the safe use, storage, and disposal of hazardous
       substances as appropriate.

   19. Continue implementing the City's urban forestry maintenance program, to reduce
       potential hazards from falling tree limbs.

   20. Continue maintenance programs for street pavement, traffic control, and directional
       signage, in order to ensure maximum safety for motorists, cyclists, and pedestrians
       on City roadways.

   21. Update the City’s Local Hazard Mitigation Plan as required and continue implementing
       mitigation measures identified in the City’s Local Hazard Mitigation Plan.

   22. Publish information on the Green Santa Clarita website about the status of climate
       related hazards and their impacts specific to the City and include performance metrics
       and data to evaluate and monitor the impacts of climate change strategies on public
       health and social equity.

   23. When available, apply for funding opportunities and grants to provide climate and safety
       related retrofits and other resources to residents

   24. Continue to conduct a survey of public and private streets to determine those that lack two
       means of ingress and egress and identify and implement mitigation measures to reduce
       risk.




                                              S-54
                                                                                      RPC (4)(a)(ii)
