A 'National Treasure' Is on Tap
Los Angeles Times, 1985-09-15
https://www.latimes.com/archives/la-xpm-1985-09-15-vw-22865-story.html
(articleBody from the page JSON-LD, read 2026-10-05)

Stanley Musgrove, president of the Friends of the USC Libraries, is pleased as can be about "the national treasure" he's garnered for Oct. 15. He says Art Buchwald will share dinner and coffee and then "stand up and tickle us to the marrow of our funny bones with his topic, 'You Can Fool All People All the Time.' " The steering committee includes Anna Bing Arnold, Virginia Ramo, David Wolper, Robert Erburu, Tom Johnson, Fay Kanin and Robert Wise. Sybil Brand and Mrs. William Schaefer head the list of hostesses that includes Mmes. Richard C. Dickmann, Leonard Firestone, Tichi Wilkerson Kassell, J. Douglas Pardee, Alvista Perkins, Robert C. Peter and Joseph Schildkraut. Hal Kanter will embellish as master of ceremonies. It will be quite black-tie on Nov. 1 at the Sheraton Premiere for the Henry Mayo Newhall Memorial Hospital's 10th anniversary, according to Jeannette Sharar, dinner chairman. James Dickason, chairman of the board of Newhall Land & Farming, and Jack Shine, president of First Financial Group, top the honorary committee to fete the hospital's founders and celebrate the establishment of cancer screening programs providing early detection. Hospital founders to be honored include Judge Adrian W. Adams, Elisha Agajanian, Edward L. Bolden, Jack H. Clark, Vincent Cullinan, Chester H. Fortin, John S. Fuller, Matthew Gelso, Eugene Lemmon, Thomas L. Lowe, Peter McBean, Jane Newhall, Claire H. Rider, Robert Rockwell, Cliffie Stone, Thomas Sullivan, Samuel J. Tibbitts and Dr. John O. Westwater. Special tribute will go to Samuel Garcia, the president of H. R. Textron, for his humanitarian services in the area. Westridge School in Pasadena dedicates the Richard N. Frank Athletic Field and celebrates "the pursuit of excellence" Saturday at a reception and luncheon honoring Frank. Headmistress Nancy H. Owen (who's resigned but stays on for a while), Dr. Lennox V. Miller, Kristen Brown and board chairman Tempe Brooks also are on the program. Exhibitions on the tennis courts and in Hoffman Gymnasium and aerobics at the Braun Performing Arts building will make it sporty. The Southern California chapter of the Arthritis Foundation hosted its "first annual" Jane Wyman Humanitarian Award Dinner Friday evening at the Beverly Hills Hotel. Actress Wyman, the star of "Falcon Crest," bestowed the humanitarian award upon Stanford K. Rubin, managing partner of the Los Angeles office of the Loeb & Loeb law firm. Rubin has been an exemplary volunteer for 20 years and serves as national chairman for the Arthritis Foundation. H. Frederick Christie, president of the Southern California Edison Co., headed the $200 affair hosted by Renee Taylor and Joseph Bologna. Concert pianist Byron Janis performed. Robert Schuller's photo with David Rothenberg fronts the invitations for the Robert Schuller Ministries 30th anniversary dinner Thursday in the Grand Ballroom of the Disneyland Hotel. Tickets are $200. Proceeds go to the UC Irvine Burn Center. David is the 9-year-old who was severely burned two years ago by his father in a motel room in Buena Park. He and his mother, Marie Rothenberg, are honorary chairmen of the affair. Many of the treatments David has undergone will be shown in a specially commissioned documentary film about the Burn Center. Dr. Bruce Achauer, David's doctor and director of the Burn Center, will attend the dinner. So will UCI Chancellor Jack W. Peltason. "A Very Proper Renaissance Bash" will titillate the crowd attending the Patron Saints of the St. Luke Foundation's fifth annual benefit Friday evening at the Alverno Villa in Sierra Madre. Rococo caters the black-tie dinner. Patrons include the Joseph Cloughertys, Drs. John and Pamela Craig, Judge and Mrs. William P. Hogoboom, Dr. and Mrs. Joseph Jacobs, Dr. and Mrs. Allen Mathies Jr., Mrs. Karl von Platen, John Watkins and more. Patron Saints on the wings of benefit chairman Mrs. William Fennessy include Mmes. John W. Jorgensen, Paul Berger, Cornelius Pings and Robert Strub. In the Italian ambiance, the Saints will do good for the hospital's capital equipment needs. What a way to launch the fall agenda! Mrs. George Karl will put the Mannequins of the Assistance League of Southern California and its president, Mrs. Albert F. Osterloh III, aboard her yacht in Newport Beach Wednesday morning for a cruise and some chat and then have lunch off Morro Bay. Booked: Penny Lieberman, Nita Moss, Bobbi Pollack, Cynthia Gillespie, Gloria Berry Duthie, Carol Carfagno, Teran Davis, Rita Murdoch, Ingela Rothschild, Pat Moeller, Gretchen Smith, Kee Flynn and Maggie Edwards. Jennifer Jones (Mrs. Norton Simon) is scheduled to be honored and to chair a golden anniversary gala at the Philadelphia College of Physicians Thursday to benefit the school of nursing's scholarship fund. The dinner marks the 50th anniversary of the nursing program at the University of Pennsylvania. It will be preceded by a preview of the Philadelphia Museum of Art's exhibition on art, medicine and the human condition--a collection of paintings and photographs devoted to medicine and sponsored by SmithKline Beckman. Jennifer, of course, starred as the nurse in Hemingway's "A Farewell to Arms," but her commitment to nursing was affirmed when her husband became ill with Guillain-Barre syndrome and a team of nurses helped her and her family cope with Mr. Simon's illness. Big day Sept. 26 for Luciann Maulhardt. The Long Beach native and Seal Beach resident presides over her first meeting as president of the Junior League of Long Beach. Her executive board includes Linda Florie, Susan Ingram, Margo Kohut, Linda Shannon, Mary Manos, Carli Steers and Gayle Copp. The French Hospital in Chinatown, after years of being blue and white, is newly painted burgundy and cream and plans to enlarge facilities and expand parking. Thus, the hospital's auxiliary lends support Saturday with a "Les Modes Elegantes" fashion show at the Pasadena Hilton. Michael Novarese will show his couturier line and Geba-Noblea will present furs. Mrs. Gilbert Schnieders is chairman, assisted by Mrs. Richard Polimiere. Sports events of all kinds, and that includes dog shows: Childrens Hospital of Los Angeles is the big winner of the All Breed Conformation and Dog Obedience Match today at the Lutheran High School in Burbank. It's sanctioned by the American Kennel Club and organized by the Valley Heart Guild and the Kennel Club of Beverly Hills. . . . Runners, walkers and wheelchair racers are all invited to "Run for Sight" today in the Eleanor and Arthur Ellis Eye Center 3K and/or 10K race at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 8700 Beverly Blvd. Starting time is 8 a.m. There'll be hosts of prizes. . . . Talented Anne Jeffreys hosted the third annual Celebrity and Wheelchair Sports Classic, presented by the Norris Foundation, Saturday at La Casa de Vida Sports Club in Torrance. . . .
