Election Wrapup : Election Brings New Faces to Water District Boards
Los Angeles Times, 1993-11-04
https://www.latimes.com/archives/la-xpm-1993-11-04-me-53132-story.html
(articleBody from the page JSON-LD, read 2026-10-05)

There will be quite a few new faces on five water boards in the Antelope, Crescenta and Santa Clarita valleys after Tuesday's election. Of the five water board races that appeared on the ballot, only the Quartz Hill Water District will remain as it was before the election. All three incumbents in the small, west Antelope Valley district were reelected. Olan Flick, 73, Michael Risolo Jr., 75, and Don Raven will retain their seats. The trio, who faced just one challenger, have served a combined 73 years on the water board. Crescenta Valley County Water District In the Crescenta Valley County Water District, the three top vote-getters--Brent Anderson, 42, Jerry Lane, 66, and Robert Sloan, 74--are newcomers. They defeated three other candidates, including one incumbent. Green Valley County Water District Less than 800 votes were cast in this tiny west Antelope Valley water district. Jim Billesbach, 55, the only incumbent seeking reelection Tuesday, was the top vote-getter with 161 votes. Also elected from a pool of seven candidates were newcomers Gordon Jacks, 65, and Christopher August, 40. Littlerock Creek Irrigation District Only one of three incumbents will retain his seat on the board of the Littlerock Creek Irrigation District. Charles Yingst, 61, will serve a second term on this east Antelope Valley water board. Also elected were Barbara Hashemian, 48, and Frances Young, 63, who served on the water board 23 years ago. Newhall County Water District The district had its first election in a decade. Incumbent Elisha Agajanian will retain his seat, and first-timers Ed Dunn and Lynne Plambeck were also elected. Three Antelope Valley water board races were uncontested and did not appear on the ballot. The candidates were sworn in by the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors. Palmdale Water District: Incumbent Nolan Negaard, a retired teacher, retained his Division 5 seat. Ronald Cunningham, deputy treasurer with the city of Palmdale, replaced outgoing member Walt Dahlitz, who did not seek reelection for his Division 2 seat. Palm Ranch Irrigation District: Two incumbents, Edward Lisbony and Dorrance Ulvin, were the only ones to file for two four-year seats. Appointed incumbent Jess Baker, a construction electrician, was the only one to file for an unexpired two-year term. All three incumbents retained their seats. West Valley County Water District: Incumbents Nat Karchem and Douglas Loveridge were the only people seeking the two available seats and will continue as board members.
