Santa Clarita / Antelope Valley : Lists of Candidates Finalized in 5 School Board Elections
Los Angeles Times, 1993-08-12
https://www.latimes.com/archives/la-xpm-1993-08-12-me-23205-story.html
(articleBody from the page JSON-LD, read 2026-10-05)

The election slates for five of six Santa Clarita Valley school boards were finalized Wednesday, three days after the normal deadline for the Nov. 2 vote. Under state law, the deadline for candidacy filings was automatically extended from Friday after all the incumbents failed to submit papers announcing their bids for reelection. Of school districts in the Santa Clarita Valley, only the William S. Hart Union High School District has all of its incumbents running. Incumbents Irene Massey and Gloria Mercado will be running for reelection to the Castaic Union School District board, where there are three seats open. Also running are Nora Emmons, a nurse; Dick Gosda, an accountant; Wendi Milka, a business consultant, and Ethel Matlen. The Saugus Union School District has nine candidates vying for three seats. Incumbents Betty Lund and Eileen Connolly are being challenged by La Vaughn Ane, a homemaker; Douglas A. Bryce, an engineer; Jim Chaffee, a security director; Rose Koscielny, a registered nurse; Gary George Murr, owner of a small business; Catherine Powers, and Dan Stromberg. Only one incumbent is running for reelection in the Sulphur Springs Union School District, where there are three seats open. Board President Kerry B. Clegg will be challenged by Gary A. DeRevere, a contractor; Michael J. McGuire; Sheldon Wigdor, a program business manager, and Dale Terese Whitmore. Five candidates are running for three seats in the Newhall School District. Incumbents Michael McCabe and Zandra Stanley are running, along with David Rapoport, a pension plan consultant who is also Stanley's husband; Susan Edwards, a substitute teacher, and John Castagna, an accountant. Three members of the William S. Hart district board are being challenged by parent Patricia Hanrion and Peter Warren, an engineering manager. The incumbents are William Dinsenbacher, Dennis King and Sandra Loberg. Incumbent Ernest Moreno and businesswoman Joan MacGregor are running unopposed in separate districts for seats on the board of Santa Clarita Community College.
