
About Suzette | Senator Suzette Martinez Valladares
      Skip to main content
Automatic translation disclaimer
        This Google™ translation feature is provided for informational purposes only.
        The California State Senate is unable to guarantee the accuracy of any translations
        and is not liable for any inaccurate information resulting from the translation feature.
        English is the default language and should be referred to for purposes of accuracy.
        Please consult a translator for better results, especially if you are relying on the
        translated information for official business.
Accept
Do Not Accept
About Suzette
Senator Suzette Valladares is a dedicated small businesswoman with deep roots in the Santa Clarita Valley, who has also worked extensively throughout the Antelope Valley and High Desert. Starting her career at Six Flags Magic Mountain and pursuing higher education at College of the Canyons before transferring to CSU Northridge, Suzette has always been committed to our community.
As the former Executive Director of Southern California Autism Speaks, Suzette’s leadership has been recognized with honors such as the “SCV 40 under Forty” by the Santa Clarita Business Journal. Her entrepreneurial spirit shines through her management of an early childcare center founded by her mother, a legacy she continues to honor following her mother’s passing in 2018 after a heroic battle with cancer.
Representing California State Senate District 23, she is focused on addressing California’s affordability crisis, making our communities safer and expanding education and job opportunities for all Californians. Her deep family roots in the region and the experience of raising her daughter drive her passion to create a more affordable and safer community for everyone.
Community and public service are central to Suzette’s ethos. She has served on community boards and led organizations, including the esteemed LAPD Devonshire PALS, a partnership with law enforcement investing in at-risk youth. Elected to the California State Assembly in 2020 and State Senate in 2024, Suzette is a founding member of the bipartisan Problem Solvers Caucus and the California Hispanic Legislative Caucus. She is also a board member of California Women Lead.
She has authored landmark legislation to make preschool more accessible and affordable for working parents, co-authored a gas tax reduction, and authored a law providing more resources for crime victims. Suzette also fought successfully to reopen Six Flags and other Southern California businesses and brought local vaccine clinics to the most vulnerable during the pandemic.
Suzette Martinez Valladares has built a reputation for achieving results in small business, charitable organizations, and public service.
Suzette and her husband Shane live in Acton with their daughter Charlotte, where they continue to be active and dedicated parents and members of this community.
Check It Out
More News
Sep 29
Senator Valladares, Colleagues Urge Congress to Back Federal Film Tax Credit
Sep 21
Senator Valladares Helps Secure More Than $10 Million in State Investments for Senate District 23
Sep 18
Senator Valladares' Office Helps Constituents Recover More Than $860k in Owed Benefits
Sep 11
Santa Clarita, Antelope Valley & Victor Valley Show Up in a Big Way for District-Wide Blood Drive
View All
Latest Video
Public Safety
Mar 12
Sign Up For Email Alerts
Follow Us on Social Media
Instagram
Facebook
Twitter
