 
 
 
 
 

Basic HTML Version


View Full Version
Page 5 - boyer2015ch14
P. 5


204                          SANTA CLARITA


                            I was very concerned about the long-term problem of Elsmere dump, if it was
                        built.  We got the heaviest rains in Newhall Pass, and this microclimate which
                        encompassed Elsmere Canyon was not understood well.
                            Council  meetings  were  long.    Chip  Meyer  criticized  me  for  running  the
                        meetings briskly, sometimes denying people the opportunity to speak because
                        they had not filled out the required cards in time.  However, we were also denying
                        folks an opportunity to speak when they could not stay until past midnight to take
                        their turn, and the council was not at its best in the wee hours of the morning. 9
                            With the flags out on Lyons Avenue for the duration of the Gulf War, we were
                        dubbed “America’s most patriotic city.”  On George Washington’s birthday our
                        flags and a local Army Recruiting sign were hit by vandals, who sprayed red paint
                                                                                        10
                        on them.  I could understand anti-war sentiment, but this was sick.
                            In February I attended a seminar in Washington, D.C., where I met numerous
                        officials from the Eastern Bloc.   There I  made a  casual  remark to  Vladimir
                        Sotirov, a member of the Bulgarian parliament, about Santa Clarita being a large
                        but young city.  The result was his invitation to visit Sofia, his country’s capital,
                        which  was  undergoing  significant  change  as  power  was  passing  from  the
                        Communists to the United Democratic Front.  He said, “We can’t pay your way,
                        but if you will come to Sofia we will show you good hospitality.”
                            I said I would be glad to make a visit.  His response was, “Great!  When can
                        you come?”
                            “July.”
                            “July?  We may not have a government in July!”
                            On February 23, 1991, The Signal published a letter from Ed Schullery, who
                        raked me over the coals on the issues of taxation, garbage dumps and growth.  I
                        was amazed that the editor responded with a lengthy note.  He corrected Mr.
                        Schullery’s statements, and I hoped this meant a change in policy.  I was wrong.
                            Steven Wells criticized the conduct of the council meetings, saying that public
                        hearings ought to be held at the top of the agenda so people would not have to
                        wait for hours to testify.  He was right.  We changed the order of the agenda.  It
                        only took one person pointing out this problem to bring about change for the
                        better. 11
                            The growth in the Hispanic population was significant.  Ernest Moreno was
                        serving on the Santa Clarita Community College District governing board in
                        1991, and Gloria Mercado served on the William S. Hart Union High School
                        District board from 1997 to 2001.  With thirteen per cent of the population,
                        Latinos were a presence in the city, but Latino representation at the municipal
                        level was limited to the Parks Commission.  Meanwhile Louis Brathwaite of the
                        Planning Commission was suffering ill health, and this was creating an occasional
                        problem with the quorum.  Louis never did recover completely from the illnesses
                        that struck him a week after his retirement from Federal service, but he served
                        longer than any other commissioner. 12
                            Newhall’s Walk of Western Stars inducted Hoyt Axton, Hugh O’Brien and
                        Denver Pyle in a late-March ceremony.  Milt Diamond, the owner of The General

   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10

 
 
 
 
 

