             l
             27234 Bouquet Canyon Rd., Santa Clarita, CA 91350 | (661) 297-1600 | yourscvwater.com




NEWS RELEASE
DATE: February 7, 2019
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE


                  SCV Water Leadership in 2019 to Continue
                    Drive Towards Best-in-Class Agency
                         Bill Cooper Re-Elected as Board President
                  Maria Gutzeit and Gary Martin to Serve as Vice Presidents

The SCV Water Board of Directors selected its leadership at its regular Board meeting,
February 5, 2019. William Cooper was re-appointed by his colleagues to serve as SCV
Water’s president. Maria Gutzeit and Gary Martin were appointed to serve as vice presidents.
The trio will lead the agency in 2019 as it continues to build upon the foundation of success
from its first year of service.

“We have a lot of momentum going, as we make good on the promises of the merger last
year,” said Cooper. “I especially want to continue our focus on efficiencies and savings that
benefit the ratepayers.”

Mr. Cooper was elected president of SCV Water’s inaugural leadership in 2018, and was
originally elected to the Castaic Lake Water Agency (CLWA) Board of Directors in 1993. He is
a long-time water professional having worked for the Metropolitan Water District of Southern
California for about 40 years.

Ms. Gutzeit was selected in 2018 as a vice president of SCV Water’s inaugural leadership,
and was the final president of the Newhall County Water District (NCWD). She is a chemical
engineer and was initially elected to the NCWD board in 2003.

“I am very happy to continue to be part of the SCV Water officer team as we make it into the
best agency it can be,” said Gutzeit. “Last year we had a lot of administrative tasks related to
the formation as required by SB634. This year I’m excited that we have more time to focus on
what the community wants and needs: more transparency, more user-friendliness, innovation
and sustainability.”

Mr. Martin was a member of the inaugural SCV Water Board of Directors. In 2013, he was
initially selected as a member of the CLWA Board of Directors, where he filled an at-large
vacancy. He is retired after 19 years with the Mojave Water Agency where he served as the
Director of Engineering and was responsible for the design and construction of over $150
million in water system capital improvement projects.

“I am honored to have been selected by my colleagues to serve as vice president for 2019
and I look forward to working with the Board and staff to continue the great work done in the
2018 inaugural year of SCV Water,” said Martin. “We need to continue efforts to deliver a
best-in-class water agency to our customers, and to be ever vigilant and take advantage of
opportunities to further secure our long-term water supply reliability.”
The SCV Water Board will meet twice monthly on the first and third Tuesdays. The meetings
begin at 6:30 p.m. and are located at SCV Water’s headquarters at 27234 Bouquet Canyon
Road. All Board meetings are open to the public.


                                            ###

About SCV Water:
The Santa Clarita Valley Water Agency (SCV Water) is a full-service regional water agency
located in the Santa Clarita Valley. SCV Water provides water service to approximately
72,000 business and residential customers. It was formed on January 1, 2018 when local
water suppliers combined into one integrated, regional water provider. More information can
be found at www.YourSCVwater.com


For more information, please contact:

Kathie Martin
Public Information Officer
SCV Water
kmartin@scvwa.org
661-513-1265
