             l
             27234 Bouquet Canyon Rd., Santa Clarita, CA 91350 | (661) 297-1600 | yourscvwater.com




NEWS RELEASE
DATE: January 19, 2023
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE


                   SCV Water Seats 2023 Board Leadership
                     and Celebrates its Fifth Anniversary
                        Gary Martin Re-Elected as Board President
              Maria Gutzeit and Piotr Orzechowski to Serve as Vice Presidents


Gary Martin has been re-elected by the SCV Water Board of Directors to serve as board
president for another two-year term. Maria Gutzeit and Piotr Orzechowski were selected to
serve as vice presidents. The trio will lead the agency in 2023 as it continues to build upon
the foundation of success from its formation five years ago.

“Our customers, and meeting our water supply obligations to them, is our top priority. Through
the diligent efforts of our team at SCV Water, we’ve been able to deliver on that promise in
these first 5 years of operation. We’ve also made transparency a priority, offering more ways
for customers to ask questions, find solutions, and learn about their water service,” said
Martin. “We’ve taken great strides to provide a best-in-class customer care experience with a
unified billing platform, central customer care location, and expanded bill pay methods, which
is available to our customers 24/7.”

President Martin was a member of the inaugural SCV Water Board of Directors. He served as
a Board Vice President in 2019 and as the Board President since January 2021. Prior to
serving on the SCV Water Board, he served on the Castaic Lake Board of Directors for five
years after retiring from a 19-year career at the Mojave Water Agency.

“We’ve also established a unified voice for our groundwater basin with the development of the
SCV Groundwater Sustainability Agency,” said Gutzeit. “As part of our ‘one watershed’
approach, we’ve laid a strong foundation that will move us toward more sustainable water
resources and operations, which will benefit our Valley for generations to come.”

Vice President Gutzeit was re-elected to the SCV Water Board in January 2023 after filling a
Division 3 vacancy since May 2022. She is also a chemical engineer with over 30 years of
experience in environmental compliance. Prior to her current service, Gutzeit was a member
of the inaugural SCV Water Board of Directors and served as a Board Vice President from
2018 through 2020. Prior to that, she served on the Newhall County Water District Board from
2003 – 2018.

Vice President Orzechowski was elected to the SCV Water Board in January 2021 and has
served as Board Vice President since June 2022.

“I joined the Board as many planning efforts were underway to enhance water reliability,
environmental sustainability and delivery in the Valley,” said Orzechowski. “A unified agency
allowed us to tackle these watershed-wise challenges with a single voice.”

In addition to serving on the SCV Water Board, he is an Environmental Water Programs
Manager for Holland America Group (serving Princess Cruises, Holland America Line,
Seabourn, and P&O Australia), ensuring vessels follow compliance standards and laws for
wastewater treatment and discharge.

SCV Water’s 5 Year Anniversary
“In our first five years as the SCV’s full service regional water agency, we’ve been put to the
test and have shown our resiliency,” stated Martin. “We’ve navigated challenges of both the
expected and unexpected varieties and are better prepared to face what comes our way in
the future. And through it all, we will remain committed to serving our community and
providing safe, reliable water at a reasonable cost.”


                                              ###

SCV Water Board Meetings
The SCV Water Board meets on the first and third Tuesdays each month at 6:00 p.m. All
Board meetings are open to the public and are conducted in-person at the Rio Vista Water
Treatment Plant Boardroom, with phone and Zoom webinar options offered as a convenience
to the public.

Board biographies can be found here: https://yourscvwater.com/governance/#bod

Board and Committee meeting information can be found here:
yourSCVwater.com/board-and-committee-meetings


About SCV Water:
The Santa Clarita Valley Water Agency (SCV Water) is a full-service regional water agency
located in the Santa Clarita Valley. SCV Water provides water service to approximately
75,000 business and residential customers. It was formed on January 1, 2018 when local
water suppliers combined into one integrated, regional water provider. More information can
be found at www.YourSCVwater.com


For more information, please contact:

Kathie Martin
Communications Manager
SCV Water
kmartin@scvwa.org
661-513-1265




                                                                                                  2
