             l
             27234 Bouquet Canyon Rd., Santa Clarita, CA 91350 | (661) 297-1600 | yourscvwater.com




NEWS RELEASE
DATE: February 12, 2020
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

                    SCV Water Seats 2020 Board Leadership
                           Gary Martin Elected as Board President
                Jerry Gladbach and Maria Gutzeit to Serve as Vice Presidents


The SCV Water Board of Directors has selected Gary Martin to serve as SCV Water’s
president for its third year of operation. Jerry Gladbach and Maria Gutzeit were appointed to
serve as vice presidents. The trio will lead the agency in 2020 as it continues to build upon
the foundation of success from its first two years of service.

“In 2020 and beyond, we will continue our focus on addressing critical water issues that affect
our region, state and nation,” said Martin. “Emerging issues like PFAS are rapidly changing
our state and federal regulations and legislation, with a direct effect on our water supplies in
the SCV. I am happy that SCV Water is proactively seeking solutions that will keep our
supplies reliable.”

PFAS (Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances) are a group of man-made chemicals which have
been manufactured and used in a variety of industries worldwide for more than 70 years.
They are typically known for being oil, grease and water repellants.

President Martin was a member of the inaugural SCV Water Board of Directors and served as
a Board Vice President in 2019. Prior to serving on the SCV Water Board, he served on the
Castaic Lake Board of Directors for five years after retiring from a 19-year career at the
Mojave Water Agency.

Vice President Gladbach serves on the National Water Resources Association (NWRA) and
the Association of California Water Agencies (ACWA) Boards of Directors. Locally, he served
on the Castaic Lake Board of Directors for 32 years.

“It is critical to work at the state and national level to ensure that the interests and voices of
our community are well represented,” said Gladbach. “By serving on the boards and
committees of state and national organizations, we are able to advocate for our region, shape
the conversation and fight for our customers.”

Vice President Gutzeit was selected in 2018 as a vice president of SCV Water’s inaugural
leadership and re-appointed in 2019 and 2020. She is a chemical engineer and, prior to
serving on the SCV Water board, she served on the Newhall County Water District for 14
years.

“I’m looking forward to further developing local partnerships and building relationships with
our watershed neighbors, as we continue our work on the Groundwater Sustainability
Agency,” said Gutzeit.
She added, “I’m also looking forward to hosting our inaugural Water Summit in April. This is
an awesome opportunity to connect with and engage our stakeholders – businesses,
government agencies, community organizations and residential customers alike – who want
to learn more about our local water supply.”

“When we became an integrated, regional water provider on January 1, 2018, we pledged
efficiency and consistency across our service area, and that is what we are delivering,” said
Martin. “Our priority remains the same – providing our customers with cost-effective, clean
and reliable water.”

                                              ###

SCV Water Board Meetings
The SCV Water Board meets on the first and third Tuesdays each month. The meetings begin
at 6:30 p.m. and are located at SCV Water’s headquarters at 27234 Bouquet Canyon Road.
All Board meetings are open to the public.

Board biographies can be found here: https://yourscvwater.com/governance/#bod

Board and Committee meeting information can be found here:
yourSCVwater.com/board-and-committee-meetings


About SCV Water:
The Santa Clarita Valley Water Agency (SCV Water) is a full-service regional water agency
located in the Santa Clarita Valley. SCV Water provides water service to approximately
73,000 business and residential customers. It was formed on January 1, 2018 when local
water suppliers combined into one integrated, regional water provider. More information can
be found at www.YourSCVwater.com


For more information, please contact:

Kathie Martin
Public Information Officer
SCV Water
kmartin@scvwa.org
661-513-1265




                                                                                                2
