             l
             27234 Bouquet Canyon Rd., Santa Clarita, CA 91350 | (661) 297-1600 | yourscvwater.com




NEWS RELEASE
DATE: January 8, 2021
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE


                   SCV Water Seats 2021 Board Leadership
                         Gary Martin Re-Elected as Board President
               Jerry Gladbach and Dan Mortensen to Serve as Vice Presidents


The SCV Water Board of Directors has selected Gary Martin to serve as SCV Water’s
president. Jerry Gladbach and Dan Mortensen were selected to serve as vice presidents. The
trio will lead the agency in 2021 as it builds upon the foundation of success from its formation
three years ago.

“I am very honored to be re-elected by my colleagues to serve as the board president for the
next two years," said Martin. “My top priority is serving the board, our rate payers, and
accomplishing the original SCV Water goal of being a best-in-class water service provider for
our community.”

President Martin was a member of the inaugural SCV Water Board of Directors and served as
a Board Vice President in 2019. Prior to serving on the SCV Water Board, he served on the
Castaic Lake Board of Directors for five years after retiring from a 19-year career at the
Mojave Water Agency.

Vice President Gladbach serves on the National Water Resources Association (NWRA) and
the Association of California Water Agencies (ACWA) Boards of Directors. Locally, he served
on the Castaic Lake Board of Directors for 32 years.

“We may be a regional water agency, but we are impacted by critical water issues that affect
our state and nation as well,” said Gladbach. “The knowledge, experience and passion of
both new and continuing board members will serve our area well as we address these
challenges in 2021 and beyond.”

Vice President Mortensen is a board-certified tax attorney, and prior to serving on the SCV
Water Board, he served on the Newhall County Water District board for 10 years where he
was Vice President in 2009 and President in 2011.

“The consolidation of local water agencies in 2018 gave us an opportunity to pursue more
efficient and effective regional water management,” said Mortensen. “My priorities will
continue to be on cost containment and rate payer value in the provision of safe and reliable
water supplies.”

“When we became an integrated, regional water provider on January 1, 2018, we pledged
efficiency and consistency across our service area, and that is what we are delivering,” said
Martin. "I want to congratulate all of the newly elected members of our board, and I look
forward to working with each you as we address the many challenges that lie ahead of us in
2021.”

                                              ###
SCV Water Board Meetings
The SCV Water Board meets on the first and third Tuesdays each month at 6:30 p.m. All
Board meetings are open to the public and are held via teleconference to protect all involved
from the spread of COVID-19. Each agenda includes a call-in number, GoToMeeting link and
instructions for remote participation by the public.

Board biographies can be found here: https://yourscvwater.com/governance/#bod

Board and Committee meeting information can be found here:
yourSCVwater.com/board-and-committee-meetings


About SCV Water:
The Santa Clarita Valley Water Agency (SCV Water) is a full-service regional water agency
located in the Santa Clarita Valley. SCV Water provides water service to approximately
74,000 business and residential customers. It was formed on January 1, 2018 when local
water suppliers combined into one integrated, regional water provider. More information can
be found at www.YourSCVwater.com


For more information, please contact:

Kathie Martin
Public Information Officer
SCV Water
kmartin@scvwa.org
661-513-1265




                                                                                              2
