nel 
 Classified Personnel 
 Personnel Commission 
 Superintendent's Office 
 Communications 
 Staff 
 Contracts 
 Payroll & Benefits 
 District Copy Center 
 KRONOS 
 Mandatory Annual Training 
 Risk Management 
 Staff Resources 
 Technology Support 
 Title IX 
 Wellness 
 Search 
 Board & Committees »
 Governing Board 
 » Governing Board Member Info 
Governing Board Member Info 
 Linda Storli 
 Trustee Area No. 1 representative 
 President 
[contact detail redacted]
[contact detail redacted]
 current term 2020 - 2024 
Linda Storli graduated from Granada Hills High School. She earned Bachelor of Arts and master's degrees, as well as a California Teaching Credential, from California State University Northridge. She began teaching while living in Norway. Returning to the United States, she taught at Canyon High School for 30 years. She served on a presidential commission, personally appointed by THE President of the United States. Linda was on the City of Santa Clarita formation committee in 1987 and served on the first Parks and Recreation Commission for the newly formed city. 
Linda’s two children, and eventually all of her grandchildren, have or will graduate from the Hart District. The District is very special to Linda; her daughter Jennifer and son-in-law met while teaching in the District! Today Dr. Getz is the principal of Valencia High School. 
Linda and her husband Dennis Koontz are both Realtors®. Their broker is Jennifer Getz. They have been serving the SCV for over 25 years. They have volunteered thousands of hours to charities. 
Linda went from the classroom in 2015 to Governing Board Member in the same year. She serves Trustee Area 1. Area 1 includes Academy of the Canyons, Castaic High School, Valencia High School and Rio Norte Junior High School. 
 Bob Jensen, CPA 
 Trustee Area No. 2 representative 
 Member 
[contact detail redacted]
[contact detail redacted]
 current term 2022 - 2026 
Bob Jensen is a Certified Public Accountant (CPA) who has practiced for over 30 years. He and his firm provide a variety of professional services. Bob holds bachelor’s and master’s degrees in accounting. 
Bob understands the considerable impact public education has on the economic well-being and overall health of a community. In 2009 he was elected to the William S. Hart Union High School District Governing Board. He was re-elected to the Hart Board in 2013 and 2018 and has served as President several times. 
Bob’s CPA related background and life-learned personal experiences provide a unique strength to the Hart School Board. With a very large budget and extensive taxpayer funding to oversee, he has used his financial expertise and business acumen to successfully guide the Hart District. 
Bob also serves as a member of the Saugus-Hart School Facilities Financing Authority and as a member of the William S. Hart Joint School Financing Authority. He is a board member at a large university and has served as a board member of the Santa Clarita Valley Chamber of Commerce. 
Bob coached AYSO youth soccer for 12 years and has been a mentor for many years to young men in the Santa Clarita Valley. He and his wife have two children who both graduated from the Hart School District. 
 Cherise Moore, PhD 
 Trustee Area No. 3 representative 
 Clerk 
[contact detail redacted]
[contact detail redacted]
 current term 2022 - 2026 
Dr. Cherise G. Moore believes in service to others above self. She has been an educator for over 30 years. In addition to currently serving on the William S. Hart Union High School District Board of Trustees since 2017, she also serves as an elected member of the Los Angeles County Committee on School District Organization as the immediate past chair and as a representative on the California School Boards Association Delegate Assembly. Dr. Moore is also Auditor for the Santa Clarita Valley Council PTA, Parliamentarian for the Santa Clarita/Antelope Valley Chapter of Jack and Jill of America, Inc., President for the Golden Oak Community School PTA, a board member of the WiSH Education Foundation, a board member for Bridge to Home, a homeless services organization, and a board member of the Zonta Club of Santa Clarita and the Zonta Club of Santa Clarita Foundation. All of these organizations seek to provide education, service or funding to support the needs of others. 
In her three decades of education, Dr. Moore has worked professionally as an educator locally in the Hart District; at the state level for the California Department of Education; and currently serves at the national level with the U.S. Department of Education as a Principal Researcher with the American Institutes for Research focusing on career technical education, adult education, post-secondary education and equity and access. She is married to U.S. Navy Veteran, Paul Charles, and together they have four wonderful children, two of whom attended school in the Hart District and one who will soon be a Hart District student. 
 Erin Wilson 
 Trustee Area No. 4 representative 
 Member 
[contact detail redacted]
[contact detail redacted]
 current term 2020 - 2024 
Erin Wilson is a product of the Santa Clarita Valley. Her grandparents settled here 60 years ago and she graduated from Sulphur Springs elementary, Sierra Vista Junior High, and Canyon High School. After earning her Bachelor of Arts at Brigham Young University, she returned to Canyon Country with her husband Joe Wilson, excelling as one of her family business's top managing salespersons. She later transitioned to home-based employment to prioritize the raising of their children. 
Erin's significant contributions lie in the non-profit sector, where she has led service, taught in classrooms, and served as president of women’s and youth groups within the community through various organizations including the Hart School District for the past 30 years. Each of her five children have graduated from elementary, middle, and high schools within the Santa Clarita Valley which has helped to drive her involvement and interest in serving the valley’s youth. Her experience and training has equipped her with skills that uniquely qualify her to contribute to the health and well-being of the district. 
Committed to hard work, positive enthusiasm, and in the process of attaining a Masters in Governance, Erin Wilson aims to make a meaningful impact as a Governing Board Member in the Hart District. 
 Joe Messina 
 Trustee Area No. 5 representative 
 Assistant Clerk 
[contact detail redacted]
[contact detail redacted]
 current term 2022 - 2026 
Joe Messina has been an active community member and local business owner in the Santa Clarita Valley for over 20 years. Mr. Messina has served on various committees and councils, from elementary school to high school, including: Hart District advisory councils, PTAs, parent advisory committees, school site councils, and many non-profit boards with an emphasis in business and student development and wellness. Three of his four children attended local schools, and he is now blessed to see his grandchildren grow up in Santa Clarita schools.
Mr. Messina believes that education isn’t just about preparing students for college; it’s about preparing students for life. “Whatever their next step is, be it higher education (college, vocational training, or otherwise), apprenticeship, entrepreneurship, entering the workforce directly, or any other life path, it’s our job to make that possible by providing a safe environment for all students to receive a quality education.”
“Today’s students are tomorrow’s leaders in business, education, and government. We have a responsibility as a community to ensure they are provided the best possible foundation to propel them into their future. I’m honored to be part of that endeavor serving as a Trustee.” 
Policies & Legal Notices 
 Student & Family Rights 
 Annual Notification of Student/Parent Rights 
 Bullying / Cyberbullying 
 Pupil Non-Discrimination 
 Statewide Bullying Resources 
 Pupil Sexual Harassment 
 Hate-Motivated Behavior 
 Title IX 
 Suicide Prevention 
 Definition of Sex Discrimination 
 Public Disclosure 
 Education Code 230 
 Non-Discrimination Policy 
 Education Code 221.8 
 BP 5145.3 Non-Discrimination / Harassment 
 William S. Hart 
 Union High School District 
 