 
 Voter Information for Gloria Mercado-Fortine. November 6, 2007 Election 
This is an archive of a past election.
See http://www.smartvoter.org/ca/la/ 
for current information.
Los Angeles County, CA 
 November 6, 2007 Election 
 Gloria Mercado-Fortine 
 Candidate for
Governing Board Member; William S. Hart Union High School District 
 The information on this page and on all pages linked below is provided by the candidate. 
 The League of Women Voters does not support or oppose any candidate or political party. 
 Biographical Highlights 
Occupation: Governing Board Member
District Administrator, Los Angeles Unified School District
Former teacher, counselor and administrator at middle, junior and high school levels
Educational consultant specializing in school reform, charter schools, federal and state compliance audits
Former adjunct professor for California State University, Los Angeles; Mission College and College of the Canyons
Lifelong resident of Santa Clarita Valley and graduate of William S. Hart Union High School District
Master of science degrees in school management and administration, Pepperdine University; bachelor of arts degree, Calif. State University, Northridge 
 Top Priorities if Elected 
Ongoing district accountability, increased responsiveness to parents and community
Build Castaic High School and complete modernization projects at all schools
Increase technical/vocational and career opportunities for students through partnerships with COC and businesses
 Key Endorsements 
Hart District Teachers Association
Santa Clarita Valley Chamber of Commerce
California State Assemblyman Cameron Smyth
 Position Papers 
 Proven Leadership Has its Benefits 
Gloria Mercado-Fortine recognizes that work still needs to be done to ensure fiscal accountability, responsiveness to parents and the community, the completion of modernization projects at all aging schools, and the construction of Castaic High School. But there is also much to celebrate in the William S. Hart Union High School District.
 Campaign Contact Information [contact details redacted] Feedback to Candidate ||
 All Candidates this Contest 
 Los Angeles Home Page 
|| Statewide Links 
|| About Smart Voter 
 The League of Women Voters does not support or oppose any candidate or political party. 
Statements have not been checked for
accuracy by the League of Women Voters. Spelling and grammatical errors have
not been corrected. 
Created from information supplied by the candidate: October 8, 2007 10:46
 Smart Voter TM <http://www.smartvoter.org/> 
 © Copyright.
League of Women Voters of California Education Fund http://ca.lwv.org 
