Santa Clarita / Antelope Valley : Board to Weigh Plan for Student Uniforms : Education: The proposal has a de
Los Angeles Times, 1994-05-11
https://www.latimes.com/archives/la-xpm-1994-05-11-me-56418-story.html
(articleBody from the page JSON-LD, read 2026-10-05)

A proposal to require that students at a new junior high school wear uniforms during the 1994-95 school year is receiving near-unanimous support from the district's board of trustees, who will decide tonight if a plan can be submitted for final approval next month. Students at La Mesa Junior High School in Canyon Country would be required to wear black bottoms--shorts or pants for boys, and skirts, "skorts" or pants for girls--and one of several shirts available in multiple colors when the school opens this fall, said Principal Rochelle Neal. She said parents overwhelmingly support the idea because it would eliminate gang-type attire and reduce clothing costs. Neal also said that her discussions with students have convinced her that uniforms will improve their self-esteem. "It validated for me how strong the peer pressure is," she said. "Many of them breathed a sigh of relief that they wouldn't have to wear designer label clothing." But elementary and junior high students at campuses near La Mesa interviewed Tuesday--most clad in T-shirts and jeans or shorts--voiced strong opposition to the proposal. Among other things, they said requiring uniforms would rob them of their freedom to choose and would do little to solve problems such as gang activity. "It's gross, because everyone will look the same," said Robyn Almeida, 12, a seventh-grade student at Arroyo Seco Junior High School wearing shorts and a Mickey Mouse T-shirt. Uniforms also are being considered for Placerita Junior High School in the Newhall School District. Board of education President Gonzalo Freixes said he and other parents will discuss the idea at the end of the month and possibly attempt to establish a uniform requirement by fall. The board of trustees of the William S. Hart Union High School District is scheduled to decide tonight if La Mesa officials can collect information for a plan to be submitted to the board June 8. The meeting is at 7:30 p.m. at the district administrative center, 21515 Redview Drive. All four board members said they support uniforms to some degree, although at least one, William Dinsenbacher, indicated he doesn't approve of students having to buy specific clothing chosen by the school. Board member Patricia Hanrion said she supports uniforms because most parents she has spoken to approve the idea. In addition, ballots cast by 172 people at four public meetings in April showed that 86% of those in attendance supported uniforms. Only 12% were opposed and 2% were undecided. Argelio Gonzalez, a parent who lives three blocks from La Mesa, said he supports uniforms because his fifth-grade son has recently acquired a taste for gang-like clothing. "He wants to wear the same thing as his friends are wearing and I'm a little concerned. . . . I don't want him wearing anything that will get him into danger," he said. But Gonzalez and other parents said that placing more restrictions on existing dress codes might accomplish the same purpose. Parents objecting to the uniforms would have the option of transferring their children to another junior high school, Neal said. Cost per student is expected to be less than $150 a year, with the clothes provided through a local retail store. Neal said that local businesses, churches and other organizations would be asked to donate to a fund that would pay for uniforms for families unable to afford them. Board member John Hassel said he believes uniforms will be more affordable to families than current clothing. "I think it's far, far more economical for parents to buy two, three or five uniforms--if you want to call them that--rather than the trendy stuff kids just have to have," he said.
