                 CREATING VALUE




STORY OF A
PUBLIC-PRIVATE
PARTNERSHIP
                                                                                          Santa Clarita Valley Facilities Foundation
                                                                                          A Non-Profit Public Benefit Corporation




TA B L E O F C O N T E N T S                                                                                                        Richard A. Patterson
                                                                                                                                    Santa Clarita Valley
                                                                                                                                    Facilities Foundation
 1		                    PRESIDENT’S LETTER                                                                                          1998 to present

 3		                    CREATED TO SERVE

 4		                    THE GOLDEN VALLEY STORY

 15		                   MILESTONES & AWARDS

 16		                   BOARD OF DIRECTORS

 18		                   JOHN R. HASSEL: PASSING OF A SCHOOL BOARD LEGEND

 19		                   ROBERT C. LEE: BUILDING A LEGACY OF BRICK AND MORTAR

 21		                   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

 23		                   ACCOMPLISHMENTS

 Inside		               THE STORY BEHIND THE LOGO
 Back Cover




 © 2014 – Point of View Communications, Santa Clarita, California. All rights reserved.
PRESIDENT’S LETTER




      R
              egardless of whether you embrace or defy the inevitability of change, one thing remains constant – the realization of a
              greater public good, which is created when resources are maximized to bring the highest benefit to the community.
               In 1998 our community schools were in crisis with severe overcrowding. The number of students significantly exceeded
      the designed capacity of the school facilities. Forty-five percent of the then-17,000 William S. Hart Union High School District
      students were considered “unhoused,” with most occupying temporary facilities.
           Funding for new schools was difficult to come by and locating suitable sites was even harder. The community faced tough
      times having faced the defeat of two school bond measures.
           Something had to be done to break the bottleneck. With forward-thinking ambition, the Hart District board developed a
      concept for a public-private partnership that could get a school project off the ground, move it along quickly, while minimizing
      costs and maximizing state funding.
           The school district’s concept was to form a public-benefit corporation – a private non-profit foundation – that could focus
      on a single school building project and bring it to fruition.
           Working with prominent community leaders, the school district board helped establish the Santa Clarita Valley Facilities
      Foundation with a mission to find a way to build the much-needed Golden Valley High School and relieve severe overcrowding.
           The task was not an easy one, nor was it without setbacks and challenges. With steadfast determination, unwavering
      resolve, and in partnership with the City of Santa Clarita and the Hart District, the Facilities Foundation set out to accomplish
      one of the largest public works projects in the City’s history.
           The resulting joint venture resulted in the completion of a key portion of the Golden Valley Road cross-valley connector at a
      substantial cost savings to taxpayers. And then in August 2004, Golden Valley High School opened its doors helping to alleviate
      overcrowding in other local high schools.
           The Facilities Foundation is pleased to have completed its strategic plan to assist the Hart District in locating future school sites,
      identifying opportunities, and funding other education-related projects, and of its ability to bring outside assistance to the complex
      financial school funding system.




                                                                                                                                                    1
“ It’s t he vi s i on n ot t h e view t h at ca n ta ke u s b eyo n d exp e cta tio n.”
                                                                                                         ~~ Gary E. Condie, Vice President
                                                                                                   Santa Clarita Valley Facilities Foundation




C R E AT E D T O S E R V E



                    Santa Clarita Valley Facilities Foundation
                    A Non-Profit Public Benefit Corporation




          T
                  he Santa Clarita Valley Facilities Foundation, a non-profit public benefit corporation, was founded to provide assistance to
                  the William S. Hart Union High School District in locating, acquiring and developing new school sites.
                  Each project has begun with a request from the Hart District based upon the school district’s projected growth and
          long-term strategic planning goals. Acquisition and development of school sites in this manner enables the school district to
          meet student population needs independent of new home developments and market cycles.
                The seven-member Board of Directors serves on a volunteer basis, without pay or compensation for services. In addition to five
          community leaders appointed to the board, two additional seats were created as a means of expanding independent oversight: one
          seat reserved for the Hart District Board President and a second seat held for the District Superintendent or his designee.
                Although not a legislative body, the Foundation follows the “open-meeting” laws. Perhaps most important in times of
          tight government budgets, the Foundation has been fully self-funded, requiring no taxpayer subsidy. All expenses are paid out
          of its own funds generated from its development activities.
                Funds generated are held for a public purpose and invested in our schools and other public facilities for the benefit and
          education of our children furthering the Foundation’s “brick-and-mortar” mission.




                                                                                                                                                 3
    T H E G O L D E N VA L L E Y STO RY




     Take 135 acres of rugged terrain in the undeveloped
     h e a r t o f S a n t a C l a r i t a , t ra n s f o r m i t i n t o a f e a t
     of engineering and geological wonder and you
     have the makings for a truly remarkable public
     w o r k s s u c c e s s s t o r y.




4
                                                                                         A group of men – small in number, but large in
                                                                                         stature – stood upon a landlocked mountaintop
                                                                                         and envisioned lowering the hillside to build
                                                                                         a panoramic high school site while raising the
                                                                                         ravine to construct a vital transportation link.
                                                                                         This is the tale of Golden Valley.




Inspired Vision:
Building a Monument to the Community


        H
                ow do you even begin to tell the Golden Valley story? Certainly hundreds of roads and dozens of schools have been
                built in the Santa Clarita Valley with little to no fanfare until, of course, the day pavement meets traffic or doors open
                to students. Most assuredly there have been negotiations, complications, time restraints, and endless bureaucracy in
        other projects in the history of mankind, so what could possibly make the Golden Valley story so unique and worthy of such a
        celebrated epic tale?
             Simply, all was not golden in the beginning. Unlike other projects, Golden Valley began as a vision – a dream really,
        an impossible dream at that – one that was seemingly unachievable for a number of reasons. The most notable being a
        mountaintop without access and a school district without funding.
             You see, the William S. Hart Union High School District desperately needed a new high school to relieve severe
        overcrowding. The number of students significantly exceeded the designed capacity of school facilities. Forty-five percent of
        the then-17,000 students in the Hart District were considered “unhoused,” with most occupying temporary facilities. Valencia
        High School, which opened in 1994 and built for 1,900 students, witnessed its walls strain as attendance topped 3,000 just a
        few years later. Hart, Saugus and Canyon high schools struggled with their own record attendance numbers. The District was
        operating in school facility crisis mode.
             Relief was not in sight as voters failed to pass two school bond measures that would have provided the Hart District
        financial means to move forward on a fifth high school. Since the California Department of Education’s school facility program
        required the District to fund half the cost of new construction, options were limited without local bond money.
             School overcrowding wasn’t the only woe resulting from the explosive growth happening in and around the City of Santa
        Clarita during the 1990s. New families moving into the area outpaced any reasonable attempt to keep up with infrastructure,
        including roads. With congested roads and a limited number of main arteries, the City needed to construct a cross-valley
        connector roadway traversing the valley floor. Golden Valley Road was no more than a line drawing on a circulation map for
        future development and not on the top of the list of possibilities.




                                                                                                                                             5
    “ In t he end , i t wa s t h e co m m o n v i s i o n of al l t h e p ar t n ers tha t m a d e
    the Go lden Va l l ey proj e ct a s u ccess.”
                                                                                                                       ~~ Richard A. Patterson
                                                                                                      Santa Clarita Valley Facilities Foundation




    Location, Location, Location


               A
                       s soon as Valencia High School opened in 1994, the District realized it would need to start planning a new school
                       immediately in order to meet its burgeoning growth. The effort to locate a site, plan a school, establish partnerships,
                       develop the site and finance the school to serve the eastern portion of the Santa Clarita Valley began in earnest in 1997.
                    The first difficulty was identifying a site that was acceptable, reasonably priced and close enough to La Mesa Junior High
               to meet the District’s desire for paired junior and senior high schools. Then-board member John Hassel first introduced the
               current site – an undeveloped mountaintop that coincided with a future City road alignment.
                    The Golden Valley area was one of several the Hart District examined at the start of the site selection process. “At 135
               acres it was too big; it was landlocked; it needed water, sewer and roads,” explained then-Hart District Superintendant Robert
               C. Lee. “However, we saw the potential of a beautiful hilltop school of excellence and moved forward to make it happen.” Once
               the common needs of the school district and the City came together, it became the primary site.
                    Moving a mountain is never an easy task. The District had to remove the top 140 feet from the hilltop, avoid earthquake
               faults and utility lines, and eliminate a good number of geological and manmade problems. The project was so uniquely
               constructed that it received an award from the California Geotechnical Engineers as one of the top three engineered projects
               in the State for 2001.
                    In the end, it was Golden Valley’s location in the center of the valley and the ability to partner with the City of Santa
               Clarita that convinced the Hart District to take up the challenge. And so, the Santa Clarita Valley Facilities Foundation, a
               nonprofit benefit corporation, was formed.




6
“ Fro m t he d esol a te h i l l s in t h e
hear t of ou r C i ty e me rge d a
di am ond in t h e rou gh .”
                                       ~~ Evan Aldrich   G O L D E N VA L L E Y
                         Golden Valley Project Manager   COMMUNITY BENEFITS

                                                         Roads and schools are always at the top of any list of community
                                                         needs. It’s not surprising, then, to find a myriad of ways in which the
                                                         community benefitted from the Golden Valley project:

                                                         •   A 51-acre high school site with a panoramic view at a cost
                                                             significantly below the 2004 appraised value of $30 million
                                                             – a savings to taxpayers.

                                                         •   Freedom to select the most desirable school site without relying
                                                             on a developer’s timetable.

                                                         •   A high school strategically located near an existing junior high,
                                                             which facilitated the Hart District’s goal of paired feeder schools.

                                                         •   A centrally-located high school to serve existing populations from
                                                             established neighborhoods and future developments in the area.

                                                         •   Relief from overcrowding at high school campuses across the
                                                             Hart District.

                                                         •   A key roadway phase of the Cross-Valley Connector, which helped
                                                             ease Santa Clarita’s traffic congestion and increase traffic
                                                             circulation for the east side of the Santa Clarita Valley.

                                                         •   Access to the George A. Caravalho Sports Complex and a Joint-
                                                             Use Agreement with the City of Santa Clarita for District swim
                                                             programs.

                                                         •   Access to Centre Pointe Business Park with its capacity to bring
                                                             5,000 new jobs to the area and extension of the City’s Trail System.

                                                         •   Savings in excess of $12.5 million in taxpayer dollars based on
                                                             the ability to complete grading for both the high school site and
                                                             road simultaneously.

                                                         •   Proceeds reinvested in over 400 acres of prime land held for
                                                             future school sites.


                                                                                                                                    7
    T H E G O L D E N VA L L E Y S TO RY | C o n t i n u e d


    Power of Partnerships



              I
                   f necessity if the mother of invention, then the critical needs of the Santa Clarita Valley collectively warranted some
                   seriously inventive solutions.
                      The Hart District Governing Board acted responsibly and developed a concept for a public-private partnership, giving
               formation to the Santa Clarita Valley Facilities Foundation. As a non-profit public benefit corporation founded to provide
               assistance to the William S. Hart Union High School District in locating, acquiring and developing new school sites, its Board of
               Directors serve on a volunteer basis, without pay or compensation for services.
                     “The Hart District’s need for a viable high school site coincided with the City’s need to develop Golden Valley Road,”
               explained Robert Newman, Director of Public Works for the City of Santa Clarita. “The school district had to move 10 million
               cubic yards of dirt for the school site, and the City needed fill dirt to build a portion of the Cross-Valley Connector. By working
               together, each agency cut their costs in half.”
                     The Golden Valley concept did more than add value. It offered flexibility to a school district willing to look at creative
               ways to acquire new sites. The common process for building new schools is to find a developer willing to trade a school site
               for mitigation credits. “We do that,” explained Mike Otavka, Hart District Director of Facilities, “but we pay market value for the
               property and the profit benefits the seller, not the buyer.”
                     Private land developers are not anxious to give up prime real estate. By working with the Facilities Foundation in the
               place of a developer, the school district was able to choose the location most advantageous for a new school, and retain the
               profits generated to be used and reinvested for school purposes.
                     The partnership was not without challenges. The project dealt with multiple property owners, the need to put together a
               comprehensive financial package, effective coordination of a massive grading operation, and perhaps the most challenging of
               all – communication between engineers, planners and decision makers from all the partners.
                     In the end, the project that was envisioned as an 18-month effort became a 4-year endeavor. “It was a euphoric feeling that
               all the pieces came together,” Santa Clarita Valley Facilities Foundation President Richard A. Patterson said. “Bob Lee saw the raw
               land and had the confidence that we could do this and make a profit for the benefit of local schools. Former City Manager George
               Caravalho and City engineers were instrumental in promoting an atmosphere of good faith amongst the stakeholders. In the end,
               it was the common vision of all the partners in this joint venture that made the Golden Valley project a success.”




8
“ We saw t h e pote n t i a l of a b eau t i f u l h i l l to p sc h o o l of exce lle nce...”
                                                                                                                        ~~ Robert C. Lee
                                                                                                                  Former Superintendent
                                                                                                William S. Hart Union High School District



Show Us the Money



           T
                   he non-profit Foundation was incorporated for one primary purpose:
                   to benefit the Hart District. The Foundation originally purchased 135
                   acres of raw land for $650,000. A $1 million advance payment from the
           District covered the initial payment for the land, preliminary engineering and
           start of the planning process.
                 The Facilities Foundation’s cost to purchase and develop the 51-acre
           school site was approximately $18 million, a significant taxpayer savings.
           An appraisal obtained by the District valued the finished school site at $30
           million at the time of sale to the District. In addition, by combining the school
           district’s need to remove dirt with the City’s need for fill dirt to complete its
           cross-valley highway, the two entities saved an estimated $12.5 million in
           taxpayer money on the grading projects.
                Due, in part, to the extensive volunteer-driven development efforts of the
           Facilities Foundation, combined with State school construction funding and $24
           million in State hardship funds, the entire school project was completed without
           the use of any local taxpayer dollars, a first in the history of the District. The
           total cost of construction of this completed high school was $78.7 million.
                 The project became even more valuable as leaders explored the
           Foundation’s ability to take the surrounding residual acreage, sell to a land
           developer for single family homes and realize profits for the benefit of the
           District. The massive school and road grading project had created several
           residual properties. Three of the lots were zoned for highest value and sold to
           a housing developer for $15.4 million. Proceeds from the sale were reinvested
           in other identified future school sites.
                 “This project took a lot of foresight,” commented Jim Gortikov, an
           experienced developer and consultant. “It has a view, prime location and easy
           access. It is a very special property.” The project was extremely complex, and
           Gortikov attributes its success to the creative minds on the Foundation board.




                                                                                                                                             9
     T H E G O L D E N VA L L E Y S TO RY | C o n t i n u e d


     All the Stars Aligned



                “
                       Golden Valley is a unique concept that required a specific expertise – the ability to develop land,” Patterson explained.
                       “Such a project needs to be in a market where real estate is in tight supply and high demand. You need to be able to
                       create value.”
                      Under the more traditional form of site acquisition – donation or sale of land by a developer – the most desirable sites
                are in high demand in an expanding real estate market, overpriced, or already slated for private development. Rarely does
                a school district have the opportunity to start with a fresh piece of raw land and control the destiny of that site from start
                to finish. “This was an extreme project and a diamond in the rough,” explained Project Manager Evan Aldrich with the City
                of Santa Clarita. “It shows the community and others that this model works and is a viable way to build infrastructure while
                saving taxpayer money.”
                     Aldrich cited the leadership of then-Hart District Superintendent Bob Lee, former City Manager George Caravalho and
                Foundation President Rick Patterson for having the vision and the tenacity to make the project work. “They believed in this
                project and brought it to fruition,” he said.

     One for the Textbooks


                T
                      he Golden Valley project also became a model of cooperation between the school district and the California Department
                      of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC). As the State was adopting new rules and regulations, the Hart District became the
                      first to work with the State establishing revised standards for school construction. “We recognized our responsibility to
                ensure that the site was safe, and cooperated with the State and local agencies throughout the project,” said Lee. “DTSC refers
                to our site as an example of cooperation and compliance with all State-mandated safety and environmental requirements.”
                     The District went well beyond normal requirements for environmental testing, investing some $2.5 million in order to insure
                the environmental compliance of the site. Test holes were drilled from the existing mountaintop to sample soil at the eventual
                school site level, and both air and soil were tested for toxic and hazardous substances. “They found no evidence of toxins on the
                mountain, in the air, or on the future pad elevation,” Otavka reported. DTSC issued a determination of “no further action required,”
                and the California Department of Education and Office of Public Construction approved State construction funding.
                     “Golden Valley is a showpiece,” explained Aldrich. “We had professors from local universities visiting the site to
                investigate some of the geological conditions that we exposed on the site. They were interested in how we successfully
                mitigated all of the conditions.”



10
“ G olden Va l l ey i s a u n i qu e co n cept t h a t req u i red a s p ecific exp e r tise
– th e ability to deve l op l an d . Su c h a p ro j ec t n eed s to b e in a m a rket
where real esta te i s i n t i g h t s u p p l y a n d h i g h d em an d . Yo u ne e d to b e
abl e to c rea te va l u e.”
                                                                                                                      ~~ Richard A. Patterson
                                                                                                     Santa Clarita Valley Facilities Foundation




Epilogue


           G
                    olden Valley High School began as a vision on a mountain top. As the story goes, the William S. Hart Union High School
                    District, the City of Santa Clarita and the Santa Clarita Valley Facilities Foundation embarked on a journey in 1998 to
                    build a critical roadway and a desperately-needed high school. Determination, partnership and collaboration guided
           the depth of commitment and the hard work necessary to complete the largest public works project in the City’s history.
                 We honor the spirit of cooperation, the unity of purpose and the power of our partnership that created a unique learning
           facility. Built on a 51-acre hilltop site with a panoramic view of the valley below, Golden Valley High School offers state-of-the-
           art design with science and technology classrooms, a performing arts center with nearly a 500-seat capacity, and varsity-level
           athletic facilities. The school is one of the largest high schools in the District, designed for 2,600 students. Moving forward, it
           will be students and parents, teachers and staff, administrators and community leaders who ensure Golden Valley’s status as a
           monument to this community.
                On the occasion of Golden Valley High School’s 10th Anniversary, we couldn’t be more proud of its place in Hart District history.




                                                                                                                                                    11
20 1 4
G O L D E N VA L L E Y H I G H S C H O O L
                                                                               AWA R D S

                                                                           • Program Excellence Award for Outstanding Partnerships (2005)
S A N TA C L A R I TA VA L L E Y                                                  Presented to the City of Santa Clarita by the
FA C I L I T I E S FO U N DAT I O N                                               International City/County Management Association (ICMA)

M I L E S TO N E S                                                         • California Cities Helen Putnam Award for Excellence (2003)
                                                                                   Presented to the City of Santa Clarita by the
                                                                                   League of California Cities

                                                                           • Outstanding Project of the Year Award (2001)
                                                                                  California Geotechnical Engineers Association


      1998		      • Foundation founded — May 13, 1998
       		         • Golden Valley land acquired

      2002		      • Golden Valley Road opens

      2003		      • Castaic Hasley/Sloan land purchased
      		          • Pledge to Sierra Vista Boys & Girls Club project
      		          • Pledge to City of Santa Clarita Aquatic Center

      2004		      • Golden Valley High School opens
      		          • City trails extension opens along Golden Valley Road

      2005		      • Portion of Golden Valley residual properties sold to Centex Homes

      2006		      • Canyon Country Vasquez land purchased as junior high school site

      2007		      • Canyon Country Sierra/Vasquez land purchased as high school site

      2011		      • Transferred Canyon Country properties to the Hart School District

      2012		      • Donated $100,000 to the WiSH Education Foundation

      2014		      • Transferred Castaic property and Golden Valley remainder properties to the Hart School District
      		          • Donated $1,000,000 to the Hart School District for the purchase and installation of
            		      shade structures at most District schools




                                                                                                                                            15
     S A N TA C L A R I TA VA L L E Y FA C I L I T I E S FO U N DAT I O N | FO U N D I N G D I R E C TO R S




              Richard A. Patterson       Gary E. Condie           John R. Hassel           Robert N. Wagenaar              Robert C. Lee
                      President            Vice President              Treasurer                  Secretary                     Director
                   1998 - Present            1998 - 2014              1998 - 2008                1998 - 2002                  1998 - 2006
                         ~~                      ~~                        ~~                        ~~                            ~~
                      Attorney                  CPA                Retired President        Information Services        Former Superintendent
               Owen, Patterson & Owen   Condie & Wood, CPAs   William S. Hart Union High          Emser Tile           William S. Hart Union High
                                                                    School District                                          School District
                                                                   Governing Board



                                           OTHER VOLUNTEER DIRECTORS




                  M. Teresa Todd          Marc Emmer                Kris Hough                   Dan Goetz                 Dennis V. King
                    2002 - 2006             2007 - 2011             2006 - Present               2009 - 2010               2013 - Present
                         ~~                     ~~                        ~~                          ~~                         ~~
                   President/CEO            President              District Director            President/CEO           Managing Partner, CPA
                   Point of View           Optimize, Inc.      Office of Assemblyman       UltraViolet Devices, Inc.         KKAJ, LLP
                  Communications                                      Scott Wilk

16
     G V H S D E D I C AT I O N D I R EC TO R S | A P R I L 7, 2 0 0 5




Standing (left to right): Robert C. Lee, Director; John R. Hassel, Treasurer
Seated: M. Teresa Todd, Secretary; Richard A. Patterson, President; Gary E. Condie, Vice President




    In addition to five community leaders appointed to the board, two additional seats were created
    in 2005 as a means of expanding independent oversight: one seat reserved for the Hart District
    Board President and a second seat held for the district superintendent or his designee. The seven-
    member Board of Directors serves on a volunteer basis, without pay or compensation for services.


                                                                                                         17
     T H E PA S S I N G O F A S C H O O L B O A R D L EG E N D




               B
                        oard rooms were never dull or lifeless when John Hassel was in the room. His sharp wit and unconventional levity
                        would bring even the most heated discussion to its knees as tensions took a momentary pause to consider the
                        wisdom of his remarks.
                      More than the occasional one-liners and well-timed zingers, John brought a large dose of sense and sensibility to every school-
                centered discussion. Above all else, John Hassel was an advocate for students and always looked out for their best interests.
                      John was a true maverick if ever there was one. He didn’t mind going against the status quo to do what he felt was right
                for students. His heart was always with the kids.
                     John Hassel served two terms on the William S. Hart Union High School District Governing Board from 1991 – 1999. As board president
                in 1998-99, John, along with his fellow board trustees, was instrumental in establishing the Santa Clarita Valley Facilities Foundation.
                      Despite serving eight years as an elected Trustee and then his last 10 years on the Foundation board as a founding
                member and treasurer, he never became a bureaucrat. He was efficient and direct, and his opinions were often served with a
                heaping dose of good humor.
                                                                          With John there was no fluff. We always knew exactly where he stood on
                                                                    the issues. His priorities were absolutely clear and crisp, and always at the top
                                                                    of his list was the question, “What is best for our students?”
                                                                         He was a visionary and believed that the work of the Facilities Foundation
                                                                    was a way to provide something beyond the norm for students in the
                                                                    Hart District. Along with many others who shared that same vision and
                                                                    determination, it led to the creation of Golden Valley High School. The benefits
                                                                    of the Foundation’s work and the contributions made by John to that end will
                                                                    extend well into the future.
                                                                         At times John prodded our local media to uphold their duty for vigilance
                                                                    and truth. He often mentioned the freedoms prescribed in the Bill of Rights and
                                                                    consistently reminded us of the importance of promoting and protecting them,
                                                                    especially our First Amendment rights.
                                                                         We think John would also like to be remembered as someone who protected
                                                                    the taxpayer’s dollar. Undoubtedly he will, but as tough as his law enforcement
                                                                    exterior may have seemed to the casual observer, we will remember him best as
                                                                    the gentle soul who lived to serve the children of this community.

                                                                                                           Santa Clarita Valley Facilities Foundation
                                                                                                                                  Board of Directors
       IN MEMOR IA M
18
       JOHN R. H ASSEL ( 1 939 -200 8)
B U I L D I N G A L EG A CY O F B R I C K A N D M O R TA R




           T
                   here was a time when the William S. Hart Union High School District was one of the fastest growing school districts
                   in the nation. So who better to lead the facilities-challenged District than a Superintendent with an impressive track
                   record for opening new schools?
                Robert C. Lee arrived in the Santa Clarita Valley in 1995 serving as Hart District Superintendent until his retirement in
           2006. His administrative career is marked with a legacy of new school construction: 43 in all. Thirty-eight new schools were
           built in the Moreno Valley Unified School District from 1984 to 1994 – a high growth region in the Inland Empire that witnessed
           a 320% student enrollment increase in a ten-year span – and five new schools in the Hart District – Academy of the Canyons,
           Rio Norte Junior High School, Golden Valley High School, Rancho Pico Junior High School, and West Ranch High School – along
           with several school modernization projects.
                Demonstrating dynamic educational leadership, strong fiscal
           administration and effective organizational management skills
           during a period of rapid urban growth, Bob Lee embarked on several
           innovative public works projects. He pioneered creative joint-use
           agreements between the District, City of Santa Clarita, County of Los
           Angeles and private businesses to bring necessary infrastructure to
           a growing community through collaborative efforts and partnership
           arrangements.
                Instrumental in the enactment of developer mitigation fee
           legislation, Bob earned a reputation as a forward-thinker with his
           strong advocacy stance and involvement in statewide reform issues.
           Increased collaboration, communication and cooperation were
           hallmarks of his career and public support platform.
                In recognition of Bob Lee’s contributions to students, specifically
           those in the Hart School District, the road leading to one of the most
           prominent settings of any high school in the State of California is
           dedicated in his honor – Robert C. Lee Parkway.




                                                                                                ROBERT C. LEE
                                                                                                                                             19
                                    ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Progress never happens single-handedly nor does it occur in a vacuum. The Santa Clarita Valley Facilities
Foundation extends its appreciation and gratitude to all who grasped the vision and worked together for a
common goal. From the leaders who led to the volunteers who freely gave their time and talent, and to the
businesses that rendered services, this community benefited from all involved.


SCV Facilities Foundation Board of Directors                     City of Santa Clarita
  Richard A. Patterson, President (1998-present)                   George A. Caravalho, City Manager (1988-2002)
  Gary E. Condie, Vice President (1998-2014)                       Ken Pulskamp, City Manager (2002-2012)
  John R. Hassel, Treasurer (1998-2008)                            Robert Newman, Director of Public Works
  Robert N. Wagenaar, Secretary (1998-2002)                        Evan Aldrich, Project Manager
  Robert C. Lee, Superintendent (1998-2006)                        John Spalione, Consulting Engineer
  M. Teresa Todd, Secretary (2002-2006)                            Steve Stark, Director of Administrative Services (1992-2003)
  Kris Hough, Secretary (2006-present)                             Rick Gould, Director of Parks, Recreation and Community Services
  Marc Emmer, Treasurer (2007-2011)                                City Councilmembers
  Dan Goetz, Director (2009-2010)
                                                                 Contributing Individuals and Organizations
  Dennis V. King, Vice President (2013 –present)
  Lorna R. Baril, Executive Assistant                              Jim Gortikov, Gortikov Enterprises, Inc.
                                                                   John R. Calvert, JRC Development, LLC
William S. Hart Union High School Governing Board Members          Larry Rasmussen, Spirit Properties
and Superintendents Who Served on the Board of Directors
                                                                   Charles A. Rasmussen, C.A. Rasmussen, Inc.
  Jaime Castellanos, Former Superintendent                         Ron Horn, Sikand Engineering Associates
  Robert Challinor, Superintendent                                 Bill Rose and Donna Carpenter, William Rose and Associates
  Patricia A. Hanrion                                              Jonathan Kassel, Hayden & Kassel
  Robert N. Jensen, Jr.                                            Joe Cota, Earth Resources, Inc.
  Dennis V. King                                                   Gerard J. Walsh, Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe, LLP
  Gloria Mercado-Fortine                                           Louis Michelson, Law Offices of Louis E. Michelson
  Joe Messina                                                      Denise Clendening and Tony Ward, Arcadis
  Paul B. Strickland                                               Alex Bowie and Wendy Wiles,
  Steven M. Sturgeon                                                  Law Offices of Bowie Arneson Wiles & Giannone
                                                                   Department of Toxic Substances Control
Hart District Personnel
                                                                   California Department of Education
  Mike Otavka, Director of Facilities
  Ben Rodriguez, Chief Operations Officer                        …and to all who contributed to the work of the
  Jacque Snyder, Founding Principal, Golden Valley High School   Santa Clarita Valley Facilities Foundation
  Rory Livingston, Former Assistant Superintendent
  Rob Gapper, Former Assistant Superintendent
  Tom Cole, Former Chief Operations Officer
                                                                                                                                      21
S A N TA C L A R I TA VA L L E Y FA C I L I T I E S FO U N DAT I O N
A C C O M P L I S H M E N T S A N D OT H E R P R O J EC T S



          •   Purchased land and made improvements for construction of Golden Valley High School, which helped relieve overcrowding
              in other local high schools. (1998-2004)
          •   Construction of a key segment of the cross-valley connector in partnership with the City of Santa Clarita,
              realizing a substantial cost savings to taxpayers. (1998-2002)
          •   Contribution toward the construction of the City of Santa Clarita Aquatic Center and initiated a Joint Use Agreement for
              District swim programs. (2003)
          •   Participation in funding for the construction of the Sierra Vista Junior High Boys & Girls Club state-of-the-art facility. (2003)
          •   Acquired land in Castaic for potential high school. (2003)
          •   Extension of city trail system along Golden Valley Road between Sierra Highway and Centre Point Parkway. (2004)
          •   Sale of Golden Valley residual properties to Centex Homes for residential development, with proceeds reinvested
              in land for future schools. (2005)
          •   Acquired land along the Vasquez Canyon Road and Sierra Highway corridor for two potential schools in
              Canyon Country. (2006)
          •   Transferred two properties along the Vasquez Canyon Road and Sierra Highway corridor to the Hart School District. (2011)
          •   $100,000 donation to the WiSH Education Foundation (2012)
          •   Transferred Castaic property and Golden Valley remainder properties to the Hart School District. (2014)
          •   $1,000,000 donation to the Hart School District for the purchase and installation of shade structures at most
              district schools. (2014)




                                                                                                                                                  23
T H E S TO RY B E H I N D T H E LO G O




          T  he lower case “ f “ resembles the mathematical integral sign “∫ “ representing the operational process of integration.

          Integration (from the Latin word “integer,” meaning whole or entire) combines parts so that they work together or form a whole.

          The two halves of a disconnected circle are brought together by the interwoven “ f f ” to symbolize the Santa Clarita Valley

          Facilities Foundation.

                                                                                                                      ~~ M. Teresa Todd
                                                                                                                  Director (2002-2006)
                                                                                               Santa Clarita Valley Facilities Foundation
Perficio Perfeci Perfectum
“We accomplished what we set out to do.”
      — Santa Clarita Valley Facilities Foundation
                  Board of Directors
