Redacted text copy of the Wayback Machine capture; original capture sha256 2b8996200e82f30013875ce012951f7db861c784f98208fc8a4c7e1f746d2a67 (not kept: it prints private contact details).


Voter Information for Patricia Ann "Pat" Hanrion.  November 8, 2005 Election
This is an archive of a past election.
See 
http://www.smartvoter.org/ca/la/
for current information.
Los Angeles County, CA
November 8, 2005 Election
Patricia Ann "Pat" Hanrion
Candidate for
Governing Board Member; William S. Hart Union High School District
The information on this page and on all pages linked below is provided by the candidate.
The League of Women Voters does not support or oppose any candidate or political party.
Biographical Highlights
Occupation: Incumbent/Professor of Nursing
Professor of Nursing, College of the Canyons
Mayor's and Governor's Committees for the Hiring of Persons with Disabilities
Sigma Theta Tau Nursing Honor Society
Registered Nurse, BSN, PHN
California Representative to the National School Board Association
Special Education Liaison for Wm. S. Hart District
Top Priorities if Elected
Advocate for parent participation, with open communication
Cost effective and family friendly, growth solutions
Health and safety
Key Endorsements
Wm. S. Hart District Teacher's Association
U.S. Congressmen "Buck" McKeon
State Senator George Runner
Position Papers
Goals and Philosophy
Continuity of curriculum and equity among all schools, parent participation, communication, fiscal accountability, health and safety, cost effective construction to keep up with growth are my goals.
Campaign Contact Information [REDACTED in this copy: contact details]
Feedback to Candidate
 ||
All Candidates this Contest
Los Angeles Home Page
|| 
Statewide Links
|| 
About Smart Voter
The League of Women Voters does not support or oppose any candidate or political party.
Statements have not been checked for
accuracy by the League of Women Voters. Spelling and grammatical errors have
not been corrected.
Created from information supplied by the candidate: October 25, 2005 22:02
Smart Voter
TM
&lt;http://www.smartvoter.org/&gt;
  &copy; Copyright.
League of Women Voters of California Education Fund    
http://ca.lwv.org
