Governing Board | Saugus Union School District
Parents | Employees | Community
Saugus Union School District
Home
About Us
Our District
Our Administration
Governing Board
Awards and Recognitions
School Info
About Our Schools
Locate Your School
Registration Process
Bouquet Canyon
Bridgeport
Cedarcreek
Charles Helmers
Emblem Academy
Highlands
James Foster
Mountainview
North Park
Plum Canyon
Rio Vista
Rosedell
Skyblue Mesa
Tesoro del Valle
West Creek Academy
Events
Calendar
Celebrations and Observances
School of the Week Highlights
Awards & Recognitions News
District Announcements
Departments
Business Services
Fiscal Services
Food Services
Maintenance, Operations, Facilities & Transportation
Technology
Transportation Plan
Child Development
Educational Services
Categorical Programs
Curriculum and Assessments
Gifted and Talented
Signature Programs
Human Resources
Student Support Services
Bullying
California Children and Youth Behavioral Health Initiative
Early Start
Health Services
Homeless/Foster Youth
Independent Study
Student Behavior & Social-Emotional Support Framework
Restraint and Seclusion Data
Special Education
Student Transfers
Wellness and Mental Health Services
Helpful Links
Complaints, Concerns & Compliance
FAQ
Our Community
Safety and Security
Website Accessibility
Contact Us
Parents
Employees
Community
Parent Square
 Registration
 Parent Square
Our Governing Board
The Saugus Union School District Governing Board is comprised of five board members who freely dedicate their time and energy to serving our school community. Our board members know that the students always come first; they make every decision with only the best interests of the students in mind.
Please Join Us
We normally hold our SUSD Governing Board meetings a couple of times a month, usually on Tuesday evenings, in the Education Center (SUSD District Office). We hold a closed session at 5:30 p.m. and a public session beginning at 6:30 p.m., unless otherwise noted.
We may schedule additional special sessions, both closed and public, throughout the year.
Saugus Union School District Trustee Area Map
As required by Education Code 5019.51, California school districts must review and make appropriate adjustments to their trustee areas based on the current national census. The 2020 census data was released to the public and districts on September 27, 2021, for review. School districts are required to ensure that their trustee area boundaries are within a maximum population variance of 10% or less as established by case law and industry practice. Districts must finalize the approval of any changes to the existing trustee area maps by February 28, 2022.
On February 1, 2022, the governing board approved the recommendations given to them by Orbach, Huff & Henderson, LLP, and Cooperative Strategies. The recommended changes kept consistency within the current trustee areas (i.e., each current member represents the same schools) while meeting the requirements of Education Code 5019.2 in addressing the demographic changes to the community found in the 2020 census data. Below is the approved trustee area for Saugus Union School District:
Trustee Area Map – Interactive
Please understand these boundary lines do not impact the current attendance boundaries for each school. Future census data will be used to make any adjustments needed based on the changing demographics of the community.
Meet Our Governing Board Members
contact
contacts
found
No contacts found.
Watson MatthewMatthew Watson President, Trustee Area 4 mwatson@saugususd.org Biography 
Cooper KatherineKatherine Cooper Clerk, Trustee Area 3 kcooper@saugususd.org Biography 
Garibay PattiPatti Garibay Trustee Area 1 pgaribay@saugususd.org Biography 
Griese AnnaAnna Griese Trustee Area 2 agriese@saugususd.org 
Trunkey ChristopherChristopher Trunkey Trustee Area 5 ctrunkey@saugususd.org Biography 
No contacts found.
Watson MatthewMatthew Watson President, Trustee Area 4 mwatson@saugususd.org Biography 
Cooper KatherineKatherine Cooper Clerk, Trustee Area 3 kcooper@saugususd.org Biography 
Garibay PattiPatti Garibay Trustee Area 1 pgaribay@saugususd.org Biography 
Griese AnnaAnna Griese Trustee Area 2 agriese@saugususd.org 
Trunkey ChristopherChristopher Trunkey Trustee Area 5 ctrunkey@saugususd.org Biography 
No contacts found.
✖
Watson MatthewMatthew Watson President, Trustee Area 4 mwatson@saugususd.org 
Matthew Watson was elected to the SUSD Board of Trustees in 2020. Having been an educator for over 25 years, Mr. Watson has worked as a teacher, school principal, curriculum coach, and professional development advisor. His experience includes teaching at the elementary, middle, and high school levels.
Mr. Watson received his bachelor’s degree in history as well as his master’s degree in educational leadership and policy studies from CSUN. He holds a California teaching credential with a bilingual, cross-cultural certificate. While in college, Mr. Watson developed his fluency and literacy in Spanish. As an educator, he has developed and delivered professional development initiatives for teachers and principals since 2001.
A resident of the Saugus area for over 40 years, Mr. Watson attended Santa Clarita Elementary, Arroyo Seco, and Saugus High School. He has been volunteering for local non-profits as long as he can remember and has a great love for the City of Santa Clarita. 
Mr. Watson lives in Saugus and has two children, both of whom attended SUSD schools before graduating from local high schools. He is proud that both of his children grew up bilingual as well. In his spare time, he enjoys sports, travel, and playing games with his family. 
✖
Cooper KatherineKatherine Cooper Clerk, Trustee Area 3 kcooper@saugususd.org 
Katherine Cooper was elected to the board of trustees in 2020. Ms. Cooper has lived in Santa Clarita since 1993. She graduated from CSUN in 1995. She has been a CPA for 15 years and launched her own practice in 2016.
Ms. Cooper has two children. They both graduated from Saugus High School. Her son attended Old Orchard Elementary and is now a police officer in northern California. Her daughter attended Highlands Elementary and is currently attending College of the Canyons. She is the proud grandmother of 18 month old Zelda.
Ms. Cooper worked with the parent-teacher organizations at both of her children’s schools. She chaired the Highlands Elementary School’s spring carnival fundraiser and the Women’s History Week at Old Orchard Elementary. She coached soccer for two years and was a Girl Scout leader for many years. In 2014, she served as a national delegate to the Girl Scout’s tri-annual convention representing the Girl Scouts of Greater Los Angeles. She is currently serving as the treasurer on the board of the recently founded SCV LGBTQ Center. 
✖
Garibay PattiPatti Garibay Trustee Area 1 pgaribay@saugususd.org 
Patti Garibay was appointed to the Saugus Union School District Board of Trustees in 2023. Prior to joining the board Ms. Garibay was actively involved in the Bridgeport Elementary Parent Teacher Association (PTA) and served in various capacities, most recently as President. Ms. Garibay led the PTA post covid and helped reinstate the school programs beloved by the Bridgeport school community. Ms. Garibay’s efforts were recognized in 2023 when she was awarded the 34th District PTA Honorary Service Award.
Ms. Garibay holds a bachelor’s degree in communication from San Diego State University as well as a master’s degree in public administration from California State University Northridge. Ms. Garibay has worked in local government for 18 years and has experience in policy development, budgeting, program implementation, and community outreach.
Ms. Garibay lives in Valencia with her husband Luis and their two children who both currently attend SUSD schools. Ms. Garibay enjoys volunteering at her children’s school in her spare time and traveling with her family. 
✖
Trunkey ChristopherChristopher Trunkey Trustee Area 5 ctrunkey@saugususd.org 
Mr. Trunkey was appointed to the SUSD Board of Trustees in November 2014 and reelected in 2016, 2018, and 2022. Outside of his service on the governing board, Mr. Trunkey has served in a variety of volunteer positions at both West Creek Academy and Bouquet Canyon Elementary, including site council, PTA executive board member, and longtime PTA volunteer. Mr. Trunkey was recognized by the California State PTA with its Honorary Service Award in 2013. He believes in increasing academic achievement and opportunities for all students throughout the district. 
Mr. Trunkey served as a delegate representing the Santa Clarita and Antelope Valleys to the California School Boards Association (CSBA) from 2021–2025 and is serving on the CSBA President’s Legislative Committee in 2026. Mr. Trunkey completed the CSBA Masters in Governance program in November 2017.
As a finance professional in the entertainment industry for over 25 years, Mr. Trunkey has a strong background and experience in fiscal operations and information technology. He currently serves as executive vice president and chief financial officer for Phoenix Pictures, a film production company based in Los Angeles. 
In the Santa Clarita community, Mr. Trunkey has served as treasurer for the Stephen Friedman Multiple Myeloma Fund, board member of William S. Hart Baseball, and on the William S. Hart School District Measure v. Citizens Oversight Committee.
Mr. Trunkey is a graduate of Drake University. A longtime resident of Saugus, he and his wife, Kelly, have two children who both are Saugus Union School District alumni. 
Public Notices
We post official public notices at the school district office located at
24930 Avenue Stanford
Santa Clarita, CA 91355
We will also post public notices on this website for your convenience.
 Board Policies
 Board Governance Handbook
 Governance Calendar 2025–2026
 2026 Board Meeting Dates
 Current Board Meeting Agendas and Minutes
 Archived Board Meeting Agendas and Minutes
Online Board Meeting Recordings
Recordings will be removed after 30 days per Board Bylaw 9324.
September 1, 2026
SCV Trustees Association Meeting
September 28, 2026 – Agenda
May 18, 2026 – Agenda
January 26, 2026 – Agenda
September 29, 2025 – Agenda
May 19, 2025 – Agenda
SCV Trustees Association Meeting Minutes
January 26, 2026 – Minutes
September 29, 2025 – Minutes
May 19, 2025 – Minutes
SCV SELPA
Child Find Services Letter
Child Find Flyer
Saugus Union School District
24930 Avenue Stanford
Santa Clarita, CA 91355
Phone: 661-294-5300
After Hours Emergency Contact: 661-294-5389
Respect • Integrity • Learning • Teamwork • Enthusiasm
Title IX
Discrimination & Harassment
Bullying
Bullying Prevention Resources for Students Who Identify or Are Perceived as Neurodivergent
©2026 | Site designed and maintained by School Webmasters
