SCVHistory.com | People | Beale Air Force Base: Biography of Edward F. Beale. 
 > PEOPLE 
 Edward Fitzgerald "Ned" Beale 
 Feb. 4, 1822 — April 22, 1893 
 Beale Air Force Base | Yuba-Sutter, California 
 [ BEALE'S CUT INDEX ]
 Edward Fitzgerald Beale was born Feb. 4, 1822 in the District of Columbia. His father George, a paymaster in the Navy, had earned a Congressional Medal for Valor
in the War of 1812. His mother, Emily, was the daughter of Commodore Thomas Truxtun. Ned was a student at Georgetown College when, at the solicitation of his
widowed mother, President Andrew Jackson appointed him to the Naval School. Beale graduated in 1842.
 Midshipman E.F. Beale, 1837 
 After a promotion to acting sailing master, he sailed for California in October 1845 on the frigate "Congress" under Commodore Robert Stockton. But 20 days later
Stockton sent Beale back to Washington with important dispatches. After a long and roundabout voyage, he reached Washington in March 1846. Promoted to the
grade of master, he sailed for Panama and then overtook the "Congress" at Callo, Peru, in May 1846.
 Hostilities with Mexico had already begun when the vessel reached Monterey on July 20. After reaching San Diego, Stockton dispatched Beale to serve with the land
forces. He and a small body of men under Lt. Archibald Gillespie joined Gen. Stephen Kearny's column just before the disastrous battle of San Pasqual (Dec. 6,
1846). After the Mexican Army surrounded the small American force and threatened to destroy it, Beale and two other men (his Delaware Indian servant and Kit
Carson) crept through the Mexican lines and made their way to San Diego for reinforcements. Their actions saved Kearny's soldiers. Two months later (Feb. 9,
1847), although Beale still suffered from the effects his adventure, Stockton again sent him east with dispatches. Beale reached Washington about June 1. In October
he appeared as a defense witness for John Fremont at the "Pathfinder's" court martial.
 Within the next two years, Beale made six more journeys across the country. On the second of these (July-September 1848), he crossed Mexico in disguise to bring
the federal government proof of California's gold. After the fourth journey he married Pennsylvania Representative Samuel Edwards' daughter, Mary, on June 27,
1849. After making lieutenant on Aug. 3, 1850, Beale resigned from the Navy in May 1851.
He returned to California as a manager for W.H. Aspinwall and Commodore Stockton, who had acquired large properties in America's newest territory. On March 3,
1853, President Millard Fillmore appointed Beale Superintendent of Indian Affairs for California and Nevada. Congress appropriated $250,000 to improve native
conditions in Beale's district. With a party of 13 others he left Washington for California on May 6, 1853. Beale's party crossed southern Colorado and southern Utah
assessing the feasibility of the route for a transcontinental railroad. He reached Los Angeles on Aug. 22. Beale retained his position as superintendent until 1856.
California Governor John Bigler also appointed him brigadier general in the state militia to give him additional authority to negotiate peace treaties between the Native
Americans and the U.S. Army.
 In 1857, President James Buchanan appointed Beale to survey a wagon road from Fort Defiance, New Mexico to the Colorado River, on the border between Arizona
and California. The survey also incorporated an experiment first proposed by Secretary of War Jefferson Davis four years earlier. To satisfy part of his transportation
needs, Beale took 25 camels, imported from Tunis, as pack animals during this expedition and on another in 1858 through 1859. Beale felt the camels performed
well. But they scared horses and mules, so the Army declined to continue the experiment. After Abraham Lincoln's inauguration in 1861, the president appointed
Beale Surveyor General of California and Nevada. Beale asked Lincoln for a Union Army command, but the president convinced him he could better serve the
country by remaining as surveyor general and helping keep California in the Union.
 After the Civil War, Beale retired to Rancho Tejon, part of 270,000 acres he had acquired near present-day Bakersfield, California. In 1870 he bought the Decatur
House in Washington, D.C. After that he divided his time between his two homes. In 1876 President Ulysses Grant appointed Beale as Minister to Austria-Hungary,
a post he held for a year. Grant also suggested Beale as Navy Secretary during President Chester Arthur's administration, but Arthur preferred someone else. Beale
died at Decatur House on April 22, 1893.
EDWARD F. BEALE
SEE ALSO:
• Beale's Cut
• Mexican-American War
• Tejon Ranch
Biography | Beale AFB
San Pasqual Battlefield
Beale Residence, Tejon Ranch, Photo 1888-1900
Full Book 1912
• Book Review 1912
 [ RETURN TO TOP ] 
 [ RETURN TO MAIN INDEX ] 
 [ PHOTO CREDITS ] 
 [ BIBLIOGRAPHY ] 
 [ BOOKS FOR SALE ] 
SCVHistory.com is another service of SCVTV, a 501c3 Nonprofit • Site contents ©SCVTV
The site owner makes no assertions as to ownership of any original copyrights to digitized images.
However, these images are intended for Personal or Research use only. 
Any other kind of use, including but not limited to commercial or scholarly publication in any medium or format,
public exhibition, or use online or in a web site, may be subject to additional restrictions
including but not limited to the copyrights held by parties other than the site owner.
USERS ARE SOLELY RESPONSIBLE for determining the existence of such rights and for obtaining
any permissions and/or paying associated fees necessary for the proposed use.
 Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.
