










Newhall Chamber of Commerce:
Minutes of 2-21-1923 (First) Meeting.
ORGANIZED FEB. 21, 1923.

[1923 Chamber Index][Next Meeting]


Newhall, Calif. February 21, 1923.
    A mass meeting of the residents of Newhall was called to order at 8 o'clock P.M. in Hap-a-lan Hall by Rev. W.H. Evans. Meeting called for the purpose of organizing a chamber of commerce. Thirty-seven present. W.H. Evans appointed temporary Chairman and A.G. Thibaudeau temporary Secretary.     Moved and carried that the name of the organization be The Newhall Chamber of Commerce.     Resolution passed that the officers consist of a President, a Vice-President and a Secretary-Treasurer.     Moved and carried that voting for officers be by ballot.     Nominations for President — A.C. Swall and A.B. Perkins. Mr. Perkins withdrew and A.C. Swall elected unanimously.     Nominations for Vice-President — Judge P.C. Miller elected unanimously.     Nominations for Secretary-Treasurer — A.G. Thibaudeau, A.B. Perkins, J.W. Doty (withdrew), T.M. Frew Jr. (withdrew), Mrs. Alice Wilkie (withdrew), Mrs. Christine Woodard (withdrew). Proposed that we wait until constitution and by-laws be adopted before electing the Secretary-Treasurer. Moved and carried that the election proceed. Mr. Perkins withdrew and A.G. Thibaudeau elected unanimously.     Resolution passed that the office of Treasurer be seperated [sic] from that of Secretary.     Nominations for Treasurer — W.H. Evans (withdrew), R.R. Riedel, T.H. Kornelissen (withdrew), R.R. Riedel elected unanimously.     Motion passed that a committee of three be appointed by the President to draw up a Constitution and By-laws to be presented at next meeting. W.H. Evans, A.B. Perkins and A.H. Wilkie appointed.     Resolution carried that the Newhall Chamber of Commerce meet on Wednesday February 28th and every two weeks thereafter.     Resolution passed that the President appoint a committee of five, consisting of not less than two women, to outline a system of action for the next six months with a definite aim in view. The President appointed Mrs. Millie M. Harker, Mrs. Christine Woodard and Mrs. Marguerite Perkins, they to choose two other members of the committee.     After some short talks on what can be accomplished by an organization such as the Newhall Chamber of Commerce, the meeting was adjourned to 7:30 P.M., February 28th at Hap-a-lan Hall.
    [Approved]     
[ RETURN TO TOP ]   [ RETURN TO MAIN INDEX ]   [ PHOTO CREDITS ]   [ BIBLIOGRAPHY ]   [ BOOKS FOR SALE ]

SCVHistory.com is another service of SCVTV, a 501c3 Nonprofit • Site contents ©SCVTV
The site owner makes no assertions as to ownership of any original copyrights to digitized images. However, these images are intended for Personal or Research use only. Any other kind of use, including but not limited to commercial or scholarly publication in any medium or format, public exhibition, or use online or in a web site, may be subject to additional restrictions including but not limited to the copyrights held by parties other than the site owner. USERS ARE SOLELY RESPONSIBLE for determining the existence of such rights and for obtaining any permissions and/or paying associated fees necessary for the proposed use.












 
 
 
 
 
 

