









Santa Clarita Hospital Changes Name to Inter-Valley Inter-Valley Hospital, Saugus
 
Click image to enlarge
When the birth of Valencia sparked an argument about the Santa Clarita Valley's name, local hospital administrator Charles S. Dyer announced that henceforth, Santa Clarita Hospital, located at 21704 Soledad Canyon Road, would go by the neutral name of "Inter-Valley." He made the announcement in November 1969 in the first edition of a newsletter with the clever name of "Inter-Comm." The announcement reads as follows:
HOSPITAL NAME CHANGE ANNOUNCED
Santa Clarita Hospital will soon be known officially as Inter-Valley Community Hospital. When asked to provide the background for this decision, Adminstrator Charles S. Dyer made the following statement:
"Santa Clarita hospital opened its doors in June of 1960; at that time, there were 19 beds, 1 surgery and 24 employees. Today, after 4 expansion progams covering the 9½ years, we are 125 beds[1] and nearly 180 employees.
"Our hospital has, as you can see, kept pace with this expanding community, always attempting to provide adequate number [sic] of hospital beds as well as excellent medical care.
"In our everyday life, we are geared for changes; Santa Clarita Hospital has always recognized the necessity of changes, whether it be the purchase of new equipment, the addition of facilities, or the continual training of dedicated employees within our hospital group.
"Many changes will be made in the future as well as those of the past so that we may be more identified with this expanding area, sometimes known as the Santa Clarita Valley, by others as the Valencia Valley[2], and yet others by Saugus-Newhall. How to be identified more closely with our community is a vital question to us all.
"You will recall that, within the last two months, you were asked your feelings on changing the name of our hospital; and as a result of that consensus, the hospital Board of Directors, along with the employees and Admnistration of this hospital, has [sic] decided that it would be advantageous to change the name for better identification within the community. And, as you know by now, our name is now Inter-Valley Community Hospital.
"To me, the name change is refreshing; and I feel it will be fun to include this new name in our everyday life."
To most other people, the name didn't "identify" with much of anything, and when Lutheran Hospital Services bought the place on behalf of the newly formed Henry Mayo Newhall Memorial Hospital board a couple of years later, the name was changed to Hillside Hospital.
Further reading: Volunteers Pave the Way to Henry Mayo Hospital.


1. "125 beds" includes 62 convalescent beds in the hospital's convalescent wing, which opened in 1964.
2. "Valencia Valley" was the name proffered by Scott Newhall, owner of The Signal newspaper and a shareholder in The Newhall Land and Farming Co., which was developing the new town of Valencia. The only place anybody ever used the name was in the pages of The Signal, and Newhall eventually gave up.


HM6901: 9600 dpi jpeg from original newsletter
HMNMH PREHISTORY

Santa Clarita Hospital • Inter-Valley • Hillside

See Also:  • HMNMH  • HMNMH Aerials


Hospital Auxiliary 1962-2012

Crash Victim Philip Deniston 1963

Pink Ladies 1963

Candy Stripers Tea 1963

Convalescent Outing 1966 x2

Name Change 1969

Judge Adrian Adams

• 1971: Executive Board Named


Candy Striper 1971

Building Fund 1972

Auxiliary Board 1972

Groundbreaking 1972

Hillside Pink Ladies 1973

Tom Lowe 1974

Volunteer Tea 1975

[ RETURN TO TOP ]   [ RETURN TO MAIN INDEX ]   [ PHOTO CREDITS ]   [ BIBLIOGRAPHY ]   [ BOOKS FOR SALE ]

SCVHistory.com is another service of SCVTV, a 501c3 Nonprofit • Site contents ©SCVTV
The site owner makes no assertions as to ownership of any original copyrights to digitized images. However, these images are intended for Personal or Research use only. Any other kind of use, including but not limited to commercial or scholarly publication in any medium or format, public exhibition, or use online or in a web site, may be subject to additional restrictions including but not limited to the copyrights held by parties other than the site owner. USERS ARE SOLELY RESPONSIBLE for determining the existence of such rights and for obtaining any permissions and/or paying associated fees necessary for the proposed use.












 
 
 
 
 
 

