









Henry Mayo Hospital Building Fund Valencia, California
 
Click image to enlarge
Beginning in December 1970, the volunteer Henry Mayo Newhall Memorial Hospital board, chaired by Judge Adrian Adams, was tasked with raising as much of the nonprofit hospital's initial $8.5 million construction cost as possible from the community. Funds were raised in all sort of ways — everything from debutante balls and gift shop sales to golf tournaments and direct corporate and employee giving.
In this instance, in 1972 the employees of Hydraulic Research in the Valencia Industrial Center chipped in $5,000. (Hyrdraulic Research later became a division of Textron, and still later Woodward HRT). Caption from a hospital newsletter reads:

HR Employees Donate to Hospital
The "Help Reach Many Club," an employee group at Hydraulic Research, has donated $5,000 as a contribution to Henry Mayo Newhall Memorial Hospital. The donation marks the first gift from a local employee group. Shown are Judge Adrian Adams, chairman of the Board of Trustees; Tom Collier, executive director; and Ron Southwood and Bill Shultis, union representatives to the "Help Reach Many Club."
Collier was the administrator of Inter-Valley Hospital in Saugus, which the Henry Mayo board and its nonprofit partner, Lutheran Hospital Society, purchased in preparation for opening the Valencia hospital.
Further reading: Volunteers Pave the Way to Henry Mayo Hospital.


The story of Henry Mayo Newhall Memorial Hospital is a tribute to initiative, leadership and community support. Twenty years before the City of Santa Clarita was incorporated (in 1987), civic planners acknowledged the importance of quality health care and enfolded the necessary elements into their vision.
Until the 1960s, Santa Clarita Valley's needs were met by several small hospitals. However, when the master planned community of Valencia was approved by Los Angeles County in 1965, its developer, the Newhall Land and Farming Company (Newhall Land) knew that larger, more sophisticated medical facilities would be necessary.
Newhall Land donated 25 acres of land for a hospital in the center of town. Thomas Lowe, then chief executive officer of Newhall Land, formed an alliance with the Lutheran Hospital Society (LHS), an organization with half a century's experience developing and managing community not-for-profit hospitals.
The two organizations recruited a citizens' committee to help raise the funds needed to construct and open the new hospital. Newhall Land executives and members of the Newhall family donated cash and stock for development funds.
By 1970, the citizens' committee had become the hospital's Board of Trustees, under the leadership of Judge Adrian Adams.
In December, they launched a fund drive to raise money to build the hospital, and in February 1971, the trustees hired the hospital's first employee, Bobbie Trueblood (Davis), director of community relations, to spread the word about the planned hospital and organize support groups.
Ground was broken September 1972. While the hospital was under construction, LHS purchased Inter-Valley Community Hospital (renaming it Hillside Community Hospital) to serve as an interim facility. This strategy enabled the recruitment of medical staff and employees, stimulated additional community support, and afforded vital continuity until the new hospital could be opened.
Construction was completed in 1975, and the hospital opened for business in August of that year with 100 beds, including an ICU and coronary units.
As of 2012, Henry Mayo Newhall Memorial Hospital (popularly called Henry Mayo) is a 227-bed, not-for-profit community hospital and trauma center. It continues to be the only hospital in the Santa Clarita Valley and offers a wide range of patient services, including emergency, intensive care, maternity, surgery, nursing, wound care, stroke, behavioral health, and acute rehab, as well as cancer, cardiology, imaging, lab, digestive, respiratory services and physical and occupational therapies.


HM7201: 9600 dpi jpeg from printed image
HMNMH PREHISTORY

Santa Clarita Hospital • Inter-Valley • Hillside

See Also:  • HMNMH  • HMNMH Aerials


Hospital Auxiliary 1962-2012

Crash Victim Philip Deniston 1963

Pink Ladies 1963

Candy Stripers Tea 1963

Convalescent Outing 1966 x2

Name Change 1969

Judge Adrian Adams

• 1971: Executive Board Named


Candy Striper 1971

Building Fund 1972

Auxiliary Board 1972

Groundbreaking 1972

Hillside Pink Ladies 1973

Tom Lowe 1974

Volunteer Tea 1975

[ RETURN TO TOP ]   [ RETURN TO MAIN INDEX ]   [ PHOTO CREDITS ]   [ BIBLIOGRAPHY ]   [ BOOKS FOR SALE ]

SCVHistory.com is another service of SCVTV, a 501c3 Nonprofit • Site contents ©SCVTV
The site owner makes no assertions as to ownership of any original copyrights to digitized images. However, these images are intended for Personal or Research use only. Any other kind of use, including but not limited to commercial or scholarly publication in any medium or format, public exhibition, or use online or in a web site, may be subject to additional restrictions including but not limited to the copyrights held by parties other than the site owner. USERS ARE SOLELY RESPONSIBLE for determining the existence of such rights and for obtaining any permissions and/or paying associated fees necessary for the proposed use.












 
 
 
 
 
 

