SCVHistory.com LW2184 | People | SCV Historian Jerry Reynolds 
 Jerry Reynolds 
 SCV Historian 
 Jerry Reynolds, SCV Historian, 1937-1996. 
Born Gerald G. Reynolds in Torrance, California on July 16, 1937, "Jerry" studied art history at Long Beach State College and worked as a private investigator until landing his dream job as a tour guide at William Randolph Hearst's castle at San Simeon. Ultimately he made a career with the California Department of Water Resources as director of the Castaic Lake Visitors Center and later the Vista del Lago Visitors Center at Lake Pyramid. 
Reynolds came to Newhall in 1971 with his wife Myrna and their three sons, James, David and Jason, and promptly filled the void left by the aging A.B. Perkins, the valley's first "town historian." By the time of Perkins' death in 1977, Reynolds had already assumed the mantle, collecting historical photographs, committing old-timers' oral histories to paper, helping organize the Santa Clarita Valley Historical Society and serving as its first museum curator, a position
he held until his death on Feb. 26, 1996, from cancer.
 LW2184: 9600 dpi jpeg from original proofsheet
 [ RETURN TO TOP ] 
 [ RETURN TO MAIN INDEX ] 
 [ PHOTO CREDITS ] 
 [ BIBLIOGRAPHY ] 
 [ BOOKS FOR SALE ] 
SCVHistory.com is another service of SCVTV, a 501c3 Nonprofit • Site contents ©SCVTV
The site owner makes no assertions as to ownership of any original copyrights to digitized images.
However, these images are intended for Personal or Research use only. 
Any other kind of use, including but not limited to commercial or scholarly publication in any medium or format,
public exhibition, or use online or in a web site, may be subject to additional restrictions
including but not limited to the copyrights held by parties other than the site owner.
USERS ARE SOLELY RESPONSIBLE for determining the existence of such rights and for obtaining
any permissions and/or paying associated fees necessary for the proposed use.
 Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.
