









> OBITUARIES
Edwin E. "Eddie" Gifford Son of John and Sarah Gifford December 3, 1878 — December 2, 1885



Died at Newhall, in this county, of scarlet fever, on December 2, 1885, after three days' illness, Edwin E., son of John T. and Sarah Gifford.
Eddie was (a) universal favorite here, where he was born and extensively known, his father being agent of the S.P. railroad at this place for years. The youth will be remembered by many travelers and railroad men as the little boy who often could be seen rolling the large truck from the train into the depot office.
He was buried Thursday, the anniversary of his seventh year. Had he been a man of mature years he could not have been more honored in his funeral. The neighborhood generally followed him in a long line of vehicles to the grave, and many tears were shed over their little friend's bier. He gave promise of a bright future, displaying a mechanical taste that was generally observed and remarked on.
He sleeps now on the mountain side, where the warm rays of the sun will blossom the rose, fresh breezes sing an eternal requiem; in sound of the rumble and whistle of passing trains, that he was wont to watch, and with the regrets of all who knew the "little agent."
Mr. and Mrs. Gifford in their bereavement have the sincere sympathy of this community, who loved their boy, his manly ,courteous ways that told of the careful training by his parents, and if aught can assuage the poignancy of their grief the consciousness that Eddy's friends mourn his death as one of their own fireside, should do so.


Obituary contributed by Tricia Lemon Putnam.

JOHN & SARAH GIFFORD
  1884 Home New
  1884 Home

Son Eddie's Obituary 1878-1885

[ RETURN TO TOP ]   [ RETURN TO MAIN INDEX ]   [ PHOTO CREDITS ]   [ BIBLIOGRAPHY ]   [ BOOKS FOR SALE ]

SCVHistory.com is another service of SCVTV, a 501c3 Nonprofit • Site contents ©SCVTV
The site owner makes no assertions as to ownership of any original copyrights to digitized images. However, these images are intended for Personal or Research use only. Any other kind of use, including but not limited to commercial or scholarly publication in any medium or format, public exhibition, or use online or in a web site, may be subject to additional restrictions including but not limited to the copyrights held by parties other than the site owner. USERS ARE SOLELY RESPONSIBLE for determining the existence of such rights and for obtaining any permissions and/or paying associated fees necessary for the proposed use.












 
 
 
 
 
 

