SCVHistory.com | Obituaries | Funeral Services for Remi Nadeau Held at Glendale. 
 > OBITUARIES 
 > CANYON COUNTRY 
 Remi Nadeau 
 Funeral Services for Remi Nadeau Held at Glendale. 
 Los Angeles Times | November 28, 1941. 
 Identical obituary published in The Signal (shown), Nov. 28, 1941, pg. 1. Click to enlarge.
 Through the funeral services held at Glendale yesterday afternoon for Remi Nadeau a host of friends and mourners glimpsed the stirring history of Southern California, for Remi Nadeau came around Cape Horn at the age of one, and Tuesday passed to his reward at the age of 73 [1] after a life, eventful and packed with adventure and action as that of the State to which his father brought him as a baby.
 Remi Nadeau was named for his grandfather, whose figure as a freighter and builder loomed large in the pioneer days of Los Angeles. It was the first Remi who built the famous old Nadeau Hotel at First and Spring streets which was the first four story building in Los Angeles.
 The younger Remi followed the footsteps of his father and grandfather. It is said that he got his business start hauling eucalyptus wood to the brick kilns from the first great eucalyptus plantation that was started by his father and Phineas Banning in the Los Angeles basin. Much of his early life was devoted to real estate, and he was a prominent figure when, 33 years ago, he came to the valley of the Little Santa Clara, and purchased the home ranch at Soledad where he afterwards spent his life.
Forms Partnership
 Almost immediately he formed a partnership with John W. Mitchell, pioneer resident of Soledad Canyon. Their home ranches adjoined and together they purchased the old Cuneo range in upper Placerita Canyon. Until Mr. Nadeau's death they were partners in the cattle raising business, and the yearly round-ups on the Nadeau-Mitchell ranch became one of the big events of the valley.
 By nature Mr. Nadeau was an innovator and experimenter. His greatest fame probably came from the deer farm which he established in 1927, and which was, for years, one of the famous sights of northern Los Angeles county. It is said that Mr. Nadeau spent $40,000 in setting up this farm. He imported a hundred mule deer from the Kaibab forest in Arizona, brought in elk from Yellowstone, and also bought the stock of a zoo in Mesa, Arizona, which added a number of buffalo to his collection. Venison barbeques were at one time a famous specialty at the Nadeau ranch.
Tries Spineless Cactus
 When Luther Burbank brought out his famous spineless cactus for stock food, Mr. Nadeau put in a hundred acres, and gave the idea a trial. At another time he purchased blooded Arabian stock and went into horse breeding. Venturesome and willing to experiment, it seemed to be his life wish to have his name connected with some celebrated development rather than to pile up money. He never married.
 In the past five years advancing age had caused him to curtail his activities, and two years ago his health began to fail. Several weeks ago his condition became serious and he was taken to the Glendale Emergency hospital, where the end came Tuesday.
Funeral Services
 The funeral services were held at the Scovern chapel in Glendale, with Rev. H. Ross Shaffer of the Glendale Community church in charge. Dale Marshall was soloist and Mrs. Alice Ripley, organist. The pall bearers included John W. Mitchell, Walter Fisher, V. Delfante, Bob Thaxter and John Perry, all old friends and business associates of the deceased.
 Interment took place in Rosedale Cemetery in Los Angeles and it was here that Remi joined his ancestors, for the grounds for this cemetery were donated by the Nadeau family many years ago, and included the old Nadeau burying plot.
 Surviving members of the family are the following nephews and nieces: Remi E. Nadeau, Mrs. W.C. O'Connor and Elton Anderson, all of Los Angeles. Grace and Otto Nadeau of Solemint and Erwin Nadeau and Marion Nadeau of Glendale.
 Submitted by Marilyn Chrisman. 
1. Webmaster's note: Nadeau was 74. He was born May 3, 1867, in Grove Lake, Pope County, Minn.
REMI NADEAU
1821/1887
Biography 2017 (French/English)
Obituary
REMI NADEAU
1867/1941
Obituary
Uncle Remi Nadeau (Chrisman 2007)
Deer Park ~1929
 [ RETURN TO TOP ] 
 [ RETURN TO MAIN INDEX ] 
 [ PHOTO CREDITS ] 
 [ BIBLIOGRAPHY ] 
 [ BOOKS FOR SALE ] 
SCVHistory.com is another service of SCVTV, a 501c3 Nonprofit • Site contents ©SCVTV
The site owner makes no assertions as to ownership of any original copyrights to digitized images.
However, these images are intended for Personal or Research use only. 
Any other kind of use, including but not limited to commercial or scholarly publication in any medium or format,
public exhibition, or use online or in a web site, may be subject to additional restrictions
including but not limited to the copyrights held by parties other than the site owner.
USERS ARE SOLELY RESPONSIBLE for determining the existence of such rights and for obtaining
any permissions and/or paying associated fees necessary for the proposed use.
 Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.
