









> SIERRA VISTA JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL
New Classroom Buildings Dedicated
Sierra Vista Junior High, Canyon Country








Video and photos ©SCVTV
 
• About GrowthPoint Modular Structures (from unrelated proposal)
• Telacu Construction Management Amendment, 12-18-2018
• Measure SA project list



Sierra Vista Dedicates Measure SA-Funded Shipping Container Classroom Buildings by GrowthPoint.
By Caleb Lunetta.
The Signal | Friday, March 29, 2019.

Marking a monumental moment in the school's half-century-long history, the staff and families of Sierra Vista Junior High School invited the public to attend the ribbon-cutting and dedication ceremony for the new buildings on their campus Thursday.
Held on the Sierra Vista campus the same night as the school's open house, a mixture of community members, students and William S. Hart Union High School District board and faculty members became some of the first to tour the latest additions to the Canyon Country junior high.
The new classrooms and facilities, housed in what officials described as former metal shipping containers converted into modern classrooms, were more affordable than traditional trailers or buildings, and Sierra Vista is now the second school in the district, after Placerita, to have this type of architecture, according to Collyn Nielsen, the Hart District's chief administrative officer.
The project includes "22 new classrooms, as well as all the hardscape, planters and additional work (on the campus)," said Nielsen. "Each classroom is made up of three shipping containers, science labs are four and the new student learning center is made up of five shipping containers."
School administrators said in addition to close to two dozen new rooms, science labs, an art studio and an increased amount of floor space in their packed classrooms, they were also excited about the new student learning center located in the middle of campus.
"It's going to help us increase our efforts in providing our students with more cross-curricular, differentiation and team-teaching learning opportunities," said Sierra Vista Principal Carolyn Hoffman. "So, beyond the excitement of our newly renovated classrooms, our modernization supports our continued emphasis on personal wellness, self-development, relationships, school safety and academics."
After the ceremony, Hoffman cut the ribbon while flanked by the various district administrators and staff members who had worked on the project.
The community leaders and elected officials in attendance, such as State Sen. Scott Wilk, R-Santa Clarita, Assemblywoman Christy Smith, D-Santa Clarita, and representatives from 5th District County Supervisor Kathryn Barger's office, were invited to join the public and see the classrooms.



  Click invitation to enlarge | Download archival scan



Download individual images here.
SIERRA VISTA
JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL

New 1964 x4

1965 (First) Yearbook

1966 Yearbook

1968 Yearbook

1969 Yearbook

1973 Graduation x3

Video: SVJHS Band, 1986 Frontier Days Parade

1987 Yearbook

1989 Yearbook

1990 Yearbook

Classroom Dedication 3/28/2019

[ RETURN TO TOP ]   [ RETURN TO MAIN INDEX ]   [ PHOTO CREDITS ]   [ BIBLIOGRAPHY ]   [ BOOKS FOR SALE ]

SCVHistory.com is another service of SCVTV, a 501c3 Nonprofit • Site contents ©SCVTV
The site owner makes no assertions as to ownership of any original copyrights to digitized images. However, these images are intended for Personal or Research use only. Any other kind of use, including but not limited to commercial or scholarly publication in any medium or format, public exhibition, or use online or in a web site, may be subject to additional restrictions including but not limited to the copyrights held by parties other than the site owner. USERS ARE SOLELY RESPONSIBLE for determining the existence of such rights and for obtaining any permissions and/or paying associated fees necessary for the proposed use.

comments powered by Disqus











 
 
 
 
 
 

