 
 SCVHistory.com | People | Leon Worden, 2015 SCV Man of the Year 
 > SCV Men & WOMEN OF THE YEAR 
 > PEOPLE 
 Leon Worden, 2015 SCV Man of the Year. 
 SCV Man & Woman of the Year Committee 
 Video ©SCVTV by Desiree Ramos | May 1, 2015. 
 Loading... 
 Photo/Linda Tarnoff 2015.
 Leon Worden is president and CEO of SCVTV, the 501c3 nonprofit corporation that operates the Santa Clarita Valley's public television channels and provides multimedia services for the City of Santa Clarita, College of the Canyons, William S. Hart Union High School District, Saugus Union School District, Newhall School District, Sulphur Springs Union School District, Castaic Union School District, and to the 120-plus nonprofit organizations that serve the Santa Clarita Valley, Calif.
 An SCV resident since 1970, UCLA graduate and award-winning journalist (Associated Press, California Newspaper Publishers Association, National Newspaper Association, Numismatic Literary Guild awards for investigative reporting, business writing, opinion pages, websites), Leon has produced local television programming since 2002 and has served as president of the SCV Historical Society, chairman of the City of Santa Clarita's Newhall Redevelopment Committee, founding member of the Los Angeles County Small Business Commission and the county's Ad-Hoc Committee on Homeless Services (SCV), founding member of SCV Habitat for Heroes, founding director of the Friends of Mentryville, and co-creator of the SCV Sheriff Station's first Haunted Jailhouse.
 Leon established the Old Town Newhall Gazette in 1994 and was editor of The Signal newspaper until 2007, when he left to prepare the reorganization of SCVTV. Today he is chief administrative officer of the Santa Clarita Public Television Authority and manager of SCVTV.com, SCVNews.com, SCV History In Pictures (SCVHistory.com) and other local websites. He is a member of the Hart School District's Measure SA Bond Oversight Committee and Career Technical Education (CTE) Advisory Group, the SCV Historical Society board, the Friends of Hart Park board, the Rancho Camulos Museum board, and he continues to serve as chairman of the board of the Santa Clarita Valley Fourth of July Parade.
 As a past contributor to Coinage, the largest U.S. numismatic monthly magazine, he has won multiple awards including best numismatic article in any medium, worldwide.
LEON WORDEN
All Honorees List
SCV Man of the Year 2015
 [  